On Friday morning, Dec. 20, three major news organizations published the latest revelations in the surveillance scandal that held the world’s attention throughout 2013. In articles posted by The Guardian, The New York Times, and Der Spiegel, we learned that the NSA and its British counterpart GCHQ had been spying on a variety people and organizations that had no plausible connection to terrorism — confirmation that our surveillance targets had included, among others, business and economic interests.

dan-gillmorThe stories were all based on the same documents, leaked earlier in the year to journalists by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. And they were yet another shoe dropping in a saga that shows no signs of dwindling public attention. If the governments running this massive surveillance dragnet were hoping the issue would fade away, they are surely now understanding that it won’t happen anytime soon.

The Snowden revelations are a classic example of journalistic critical mass. The journalists covering them have used the documents to identify and amplify an issue of such importance and scope that it doesn’t flame up and out in the manner of most stories. Rather, this one has gained weight in the public sphere as time goes on, in what Jay Rosen aptly calls the “Snowden Effect.”

In 2014 and beyond, journalists should be inspired by the Snowden effect. They should focus more on critical mass — how to achieve it and how to sustain it. If journalism is to matter, we can’t just raise big topics. We have to spread them, and then sustain them.

It used to be that the daily newspaper — whether a national daily like the Times or a community paper — could do this simply by putting a story on Page 1. TV news broadcasts and programs like 60 Minutes (back when when they did actual journalism) could also put things on the public agenda.

But in a world of increasingly fragmented media creation, critical mass is more difficult. Social networks — viral marketing — can help. It isn’t enough, however, except in the rarest of circumstances, and it can go badly wrong (see Kony), though it can help.

Achieving genuine critical mass obliges journalists to rethink old traditions, especially competitive ones. “Exclusives” can be counterproductive if they lead other journalists to ignore or downplay the news, whether out of jealousy or inability to get the confirming source material for their own coverage.

The NSA revelations were different because the journalists who received the documents, Glenn Greenwald and Laura Poitras, gave some of them to a variety of news organizations. And at least one of those news organizations, The Guardian (disclosure: I write a weekly column for its U.S. website), further shared what it had, in part to prevent U.K. authorities from shutting down the coverage. Moreover, the journalists and organizations have paced themselves in revealing new information every week or two, in a drumbeat that reveals one stunning piece of news after another.

This nearly unprecedented level of cooperation has turned a multimedia, multi-organization journalistic epic. It’s almost like a great weekly TV show, where we look forward to the latest installment, expecting a new twist in each episode.

Journalists will increasingly recognize the value of collaboration and cooperation — and of shedding their old “not invented here” attitudes. They’ll understand that bringing vital information to the public is, in part, a campaign and not just an act of publishing.

We’ll be campaigning to get people’s attention. We’ll be keeping the heat on the bad guys, and celebrating the things that work, enthusiastically if not relentlessly.

This won’t be only for national and global issues. At the local level, critical mass will be even harder to achieve, perhaps, given the way local newspapers have withered and the way local TV “news” is mostly a cynical, crime-driven exercise. Local information providers of all kinds, including bloggers, Facebook page managers and others who care about their communities, will share what they know, and will leverage traditional methods of organizing to get the public to focus on things that matter.

Of all the things we’re losing in the crumbling of traditional media institutions, critical mass would be the most difficult to replace if we don’t re-imagine what’s possible and re-think our approach. The Snowden effect — and the journalists who’ve made it possible — show what can happen when we do.

One of the most important trends going into 2014 is the wave of sophisticated algorithms and processes that will forever change how journalism is both created and consumed. They are inherently social, but not in the way you may think. And they rely on the vast repositories of data we generate each time we connect, whether that’s searching Google for a restaurant, wishing friends happy birthday on Facebook, or posting an in-line annotation on Medium.

amy-webbThis past year, we saw the first anticipatory computing opportunities in Google Now, which originally launched as part of the Android operating system, and an app called MindMeld, created by former MIT researcher and current Expect Labs CEO Tim Tuttle. In short, apps like Google Now and MindMeld observe the last few minutes of your thought process in order to predict the next 10 seconds.

In the case of Google Now, if you’ve been searching Google for information about the new movie Inside Llewyn Davis and then ask it “Where is it playing?” Google Now assumes you want to know the nearest movie theater, times, and perhaps even directions on how to get there from where you’re standing. MindMeld offers something even more exciting. When users are connected, it listens in and begins to populate its dashboard with contextual information to help you have a more informed conversation. So if you’re talking with a friend about Llewyn Davis, MindMeld will automatically show history about the 1960s folk scene, the cast, directors, details about the soundtrack, reviews and more.

In the hands of journalists, these and the other emergent anticipatory computing applications can be harnessed as powerful reporters’ assistants. Google Now can query calendars, traffic, weather, and news to deliver just the right information at the right time. Example: It might see that there’s heavy traffic along your route and alert you to leave seven minutes earlier than you normally would. MindMeld has the power to deliver contextual content to reporters as they’re conducting an interview. Suddenly that usual last question “Is there anything else I should ask you?” seems irrelevant while using MindMeld, since it would have already unearthed ambient information you might have missed during the conversation.

If apps can anticipate our next thoughts, then algorithms should allow for two interesting possibilities in 2014: predicting breaking news and delivering highly personalized content to each consumer.

Already, social feeds can be mined and crunched to show crises as they start to erupt. This is especially obvious during sporting events, when fans tend to post sentiment, then photos or videos of fights and eventually the details of large brawls after games. Some companies, such as IBM, have been harnessing big data along with artificial intelligence and machine learning to infer changes in the real world. This isn’t about predicting the news a few days from now — it’s about seeing a breaking news event just as it’s about to unfold.

News organizations have long hoped for meaningful personalization — the more directly a news product can be tailored for each individual, the more likely she’ll be to stay with that brand and to use it over and over. Personalization experiments have failed at numerous big media brands, but it’s because the approach has always been too rudimentary. Users would tick a few interests, like “sports” and “world news,” and depending on how well the backend system was programmed, stories that kind-of sort-of fit into those categories would be delivered. Selecting a few broad categories never allows for nuances in geography, taste, or even our changing interests as we have fresh ideas and encounter new people.

Our interests are temporal, as is the news cycle. But those two don’t always align perfectly. If you think about it, the exciting promise of Google Now and MindMeld is in the ability to anticipate what content might interest us next. It eviscerates the need for related content, since ostensibly all of the content we’d be delivered is relatable only to each one of us individually.

As a result, news organizations have thrilling opportunities in the months ahead to supercharge the reporting process and to personalize content in ways we have never seen before. The future of news is anticipatory.

One of the most popular new games of 2013 was an addictive mobile app called Dots: A Game About Connecting from Betaworks. It’s deceptively simple: a white board full of evenly spaced colored dots worth points when connected in a short amount of time. You can play instantly without reading the rules, or you can get immersive and obsessively strategic. You can play against yourself or against an expanding universe. You can play for free or you can buy ways to improve your game — but the choice is up to each player: earn your way to advancement or pay for it.

staci-d. kramerThe game launched on iOS in May and had a million users within days. Now also on Android, it passed 15 million installs in November. By early fall, it had been played a billion times.

For the media in 2014, connecting the dots has to be more than a game. We have to connect the fragments of information that flood the zone daily. We have to connect with our communities. We have to connect with each other.

Connecting information
We have never had this much access to information or so much ability to discover, create, and share. Making it meaningful, discoverable, and truly accessible is simultaneously the media’s toughest challenge and greatest opportunity. I can hear at least one of you now pointing out that the toughest challenge is making it pay. Fair point, but unless we can do those three things, we can’t do that either.

In 2014, connecting the information dots:

will take an even greater emphasis on finding compelling ways to pull together information and tell stories. Call it Snow Fall, call it listicles, call it anything you want as long there’s not more style than substance.
means making the most of what we already have. The Village Voice did that recently with “Read the ‘Stomach-Churning’ Sexual Assault Accusations Against R. Kelly in Full”; not pretty, but the way the story was told by Jessica Harper in a strong interview with music journalist Jim DeRogatis, combined with access to the documents, made a widely discussed package readers won’t soon forget.
means more single-topic or immersive niche coverage. At the same time, it also means not ignoring the need for some of that news and information to move outside the niche to the general news flow.
will require better navigation and personalization for users.
Connecting with our communities
We’ve also never had a time in the modern news era when it was so easy to connect with our users or to create communities that stretch beyond physical proximity. When we can have or facilitate real conversations, it raises the value of what we do. When we get useful feedback, it makes what we do better.

That same ease of connection comes with a heavy price when it’s used to spread vitriol instead of honest debate. When people who brag about being great husbands/wives/students or good fill-in-the-religion have zero compunction tossing personal insults at strangers or casting slurs that would get them punched at a bar, trying to carry on that conversation can be exhausting, draining, and frustrating.

This isn’t a new problem, but the same rise of social media that gives us more ways to reach out and be reached also makes it easier to spread the worst.

A number of news organizations have shut the doors to comments, citing limited resources, poor tools, or low returns on the investment. Understandable. Unfortunate. Open mic is too costly when it creates an environment no one wants to share; shutting off the valve either takes the steam out completely or sends it another location. Journalism can’t afford either of those options.

On the plus side, we have Nick Denton, who sees connecting the people who come to Gawker Media as the publishing company’s future. His version of that future is the discussion platform Kinja, which gives users their own blogs and the same tools of engagement as Gawker’s editors to create and manage discussions. True, Gawker discussions aren’t for the faint-hearted, but the communities and the sites are usually in sync.

We can’t legislate civility. We can’t force people to comment. But in 2014, we need more Dentons looking for a solution and fewer shut-off valves.

Connecting with each other
Sometimes the wheel needs to be reinvented. Sometimes the inability to communicate or the comfort of living in a bubble means the wheel will be reinvented constantly by lots of different people, whether it needs it or not. Sometimes attacking the same problem separately (as individuals, teams, or groups) results in major improvements — and sometimes it’s simply a waste of time and resources.

After watching or being part of discussions at ONA’s recent conference and News Foo to create journalism tools for breaking news, I left convinced that we have some serious firepower to throw at problems — and that, far too often, we have no idea if those problems already have good solutions in play elsewhere that could be used, adapted or improved upon.

In 2014, we can do a better job of connecting with each other, sharing the tools that are out there and working on the problems yet to be solved in ways that make the most of our limited resources.

Call me stupid, but I think journalism is a exciting way to change the world. But in order to do that these days, we need to favor change and promote disruptive innovation within the news and information ecosystem — and start thinking way outside the box.

miguel-pazThis is something I’ve been working towards as hard as possible for several years: as a Knight Fellow at the International Center for Journalists; through Poderopedia.org, a website that reveals the links among Chilean business and political elites; and Hacks/Hackers Chile and Poderomedia Foundation, an organization that promotes the open web and the use of technologies to rethink journalism, teach new skills to journalists, and foster cultural change in newsrooms in Latin America. So far this year, I’ve organized and taken part in 10 hackathons, two radiothons, two data journalism bootcamps, helped create a civic lab, participated in the birth of Chicas Poderosas (powerful women in newsroom tech), and collaborated on at least 30 workshops for journalists, students, and newsrooms around South America.

I still have the same questions you probably do too: How can we fund journalism and make it profitable? How can we best do journalism in the digital era, embracing new tools, formats, and business models while bringing technologists to the table? How can we build interdisciplinary teams with new workflows, and job definitions? How can we use the massive amounts of data out there to ask the right questions and get the right answers? Here are some of my predictions for what we’ll learn about those questions in 2014.

Journalism needs nerds!: Finally, some Latin American newsrooms will start understanding that news nerds — developers coding in the public interest within media — are an essential part of quality reporting. In 2014, we will see more programmers coming into Latin American newsrooms as part of journalism teams. According to what I’ve seen, at least five new data-driven teams and a couple of news app teams will start working across the region. In 2013, hackdays, hackathons, workshops, app challenges, and events — organized by Hacks/Hackers chapters (Buenos Aires’ is the biggest in the world, Chile’s is ninth), Chicas Poderosas, and joint efforts by organizations like ICFJ, Knight Foundation, the World Bank, Knight-Mozilla OpenNews, Grupo de Diarios de America, Global Investigative Journalism Network, Consejo de Redacción, Colpin, the Knight Center for the Americas, IPYS Venezuela, FNPI and others — all paved the way to help media owners, editors, and journalists grasp the real impact developers can have in news. Websites like this one and the awesome work by NPR, ProPublica, NICAR, and so many others I fail to mention set the bar as well.
A local style of venture capital: Initiatives like the Media Factory, a startup accelerator which focuses exclusively on the business of online news and journalism, managed by Mariano Blejman, supported by the Media Development Investment Fund and other venture capitalists, will invest $75,000 per company in content-related startups. Their “Bollywood” mindset — closer to the local investor’s exit strategies and market reality, rather than the Hollywood/Sillicon Valley type of investment — will generate new endeavours. We should expect at least one or two big surprises from these guys.
The rise of Latin American media- and news-related startups: In the same way that MediaFactory has laid its eyes across Latin America, programs like StartupChile, StartupBrasil, and other accelerator programs like Wayra, have given space to media and news related startups that will become regional players in most cases — or try to go global in others. Companies like Janus (a Tivo or Netflix for streaming, check an sample use), Kewen (a social connection app that provides audience metrics and insights for media; disclosure: I’m a investor there), and many other projects being developed as you read this will go big or go home in 2014. Nevertheless, we will see the birth of at least five new online news ventures in the region, especially in niches like business, politics, technology, and other specific verticals. Most should come along with hybrid business models, based on brand, mission, and community.
English-speaking networks, and maybe a Chinese-language one: As The New York Times and Huffington Post expand outside their home countries, there’s a good chance that a player like The Guardian, for example, will give a try to setting up a English-language news network in the region. Local big players could also consider creating high-end English-language regional niche products about business, finance, and natural resource markets to feed the unfulfilled need of top-paying customers with huge economic interests in South America. Along these lines, considering the importance of China’s import/export economy and the country’s investments across the Pacific, it shouldn’t come as a surprise if a new Chinese-language project comes to life.
The World Cup effect: The global sports event will be hosted by Brazil in June, and it will be like a kid hyped up on sugar for newsrooms and new content-, context-, and news-related ventures in the region. Lots of mobile-first and lots of experiments will follow la pelota.
Semantic web, social network analysis, entity extraction, and news-as-API: This is nerd stuff, but it will become important — a few news projects are already working on it. If they can prove these ideas can be good for business, others will follow.
Data journalism for hire: New data-driven studios and agencies will provide special services and develop projects for newsrooms and other type of clients who cannot afford to have in-house news app teams — or who still don’t want to make the investment. It will become a space for very talented journalists, designers, and programmers who have a track record of success. These ninja-news-nerd teams will also embed in newsrooms to accelerate learning and provide consultancy for setting up inhouse teams. The Offshoreleaks project, developed by the La Nación team in Costa Rica and the collaboration by Mariana Santos with La Tercera in Chile are examples of that trend.
Open data in journalism: We will see more news projects and news apps using open data. These projects, from the demand side of data, will give validation to the international open data scene. The key: doing useful things for the audience, things that have a positive or negative impact in people’s lives.
Paywall alert!: Without enough testing (in my opinion), many of the biggest newsgroups in Latin America are preparing to launch full-scale, big-bang paywalls, following the model of The New York Times. This could be a great opportunity for the new kids on the block that will emerge in 2014.
Please, no more McKinsey: While newsgroups in Latin America tend to avoid investing in startups or small-scale projects that can be tested fast to see if they fly, they are usually very pleased to spend millions of dollars in McKinsey-type consultants who come in, shake a few hands, and roll out a template solution they’ve already sold to other big players in the region. The results, in most cases, are not good. So please stop hiring the McKinseys of the world and start listening to the smart people who work for you and know your product.
To broaden the perspectives, here are predictions from other journalists from Spain and Latin America.

gumersindo-lafuenteGumersindo Lafuente, former online director, El País (Spain): “For journalism, Google will lose influence; Facebook and above all Twitter, especially from mobile devices, will rise. In more advanced countries, access to information via PC will collapse, with growth only in tablets and smartphones. Paywalls will expand, but with disappointing results.”

dario-galloDarío Gallo, deputy editor of Clarín.com (Argentina): “Mobile-focused newsrooms will start to be born. We will pass from the age of responsive design to the era of responsive content. The process of permanent adaptation will continue.”

Andrés Azócar, digital chief, Canal13 (Chile): “Latin America has so far been more or less immune to the severe crisis that is affecting the media in Europe and the U.S. Protected by growing economies and lower levels of connectivity in the first world, the media until now successfully overcome the financial cataclysm. Even in recent years managed to historical earnings, as was the case of Chile in 2011.

andres-azocar“But in recent years, the trend has begun to change. Competition from Google and Facebook (regardless of country, accounting for 50 percent or more of the market), the tyranny of the agencies, and the low yields of traditional display ads force the media to reorganize their sales areas and point to native advertising and video, which have higher CPMs. The feeling that the crisis is yet to come will become stronger. 2014 will be harder for the media in Latin America, but still — the worst is yet to come.”

rodrigo-guaiquilRodrigo Guaiquil, COO, AmericaEconomia.com (Chile): “I think newsrooms will begin to worry about multiplatform user experience. They will change the design of their sites to adopt the flat design of iOS 7 applications, so that they will be able to offer a more consistent experience on desktop, mobile, and tablet. Thus they will move away from the traditional front-page style of a daily paper and become more flexible and adaptable, navigable, touchable, clickable. They will take as reference sites like USAToday.com and Quartz.”

gabriel-pasquiniGabriel Pasquini, founder and director, El Puercoespín (Argentina): “In the past few years, there have been several attempts (some successful) to charge users for content. This alternative is increasingly being considered by small- and medium-sized publications outside of the United States, where advertising revenue is (and will be) definitely scarce and insufficient, and crowdfunding is being seen more and more as the ideal (or sole) source of funding. But the tools to collect money from the crowd are still quite primitive outside of the U.S. (and to some extent, even in the U.S.). My prediction is that in the next two years, we will see the development of new tools which will change not just how to offer content but how to relate with our communities/readers. The search for money — more specifically, money from the crowd — will make us rethink ourselves and what we do once again.”

If you asked me what are the three main challenges of any newspaper company today, my answer would be:

juan-antonio-giner
first, to evolve from mono-media companies to multimedia information engines;
second, to integrate all your editorial and business resources into an open multimedia newsroom;
and third, to rethink and reinvent the editorial models of your print products in this new multimedia landscape.
All of them are unavoidable. The first one must be led by owners, CEOs, and publishers. The second one needs the understanding and full support of top editors and general managers. And the third one, the most crucial one, the participation and involvement of all journalists.

Bosses can rule on vision, strategy, integration, and media architecture — but only with all your journalists aboard your company will be able to develop new editorial models.

Why? Because most of your editors, writers, reporters, and visual journalists came to your company when the print newspaper had an editorial model that for centuries nobody challenged. Newspaper newsrooms were, and always will be, the “core” of our news business. They were the best to find, select, write, edit, and design news and stories that your readers couldn’t find anywhere else.

For this reason, we presented ourselves as “newspapers of record.” Something that, today, we aren’t anymore. As The New York Times says: “We don’t record the news. We find the news.” A training manual for new Financial Times journalists is very clear on this point: “News reporters do two things. They find the news and they write news. The first is hugely more important.”

In the past, every 24 hours, our newsrooms were able to produce a print newspaper with exclusive content, and readers needed to pay for our daily selection of the most relevant and interesting news and stories of the day before.

But that model has crashed. It’s dead and doesn’t work anymore. “Yesterday’s newspapers” are worthless. Our readers today get almost all their news in real time: news, opinions, and yes, instant analysis. So they don’t need us anymore — unless we are able to produce a 100 percent different, compact, and compelling new print product.

They’re drinking news from the firehose and what they are requesting from us is the “day after” newspaper.

A newspaper for well informed readers, not the ignorant. A newspaper for new audiences fed 24/7 by new digital media outlets. A newspaper for new communities able to share news, opinions, and comments in social media networks. A newspaper that breaks the news online and on other realtime platforms. A newspaper that produces multimedia packages on the spot. A newspaper that has iPad and tablet editions, early in the morning, at lunch time, and in the evening.

Yes, this is cannibalization at its best and its worst.

For all these reasons, if we don’t change the editorial model, our print product becomes just a compilation of old news, known stories, and heard comments. Dead bodies. Forensic journalism. Outdated content that nobody needs, nobody will pay for, deserted by advertisers that will realize that we are losing ground, not having anything new, unique, and necessary to buy our print paper.

The answer to all these challenges is, again, what we at Innovation call the “day after” newspaper. A post-news, post-television, post-radio, post-online, and post-social media paper.

A newspaper with a daily briefing with the last 24 hours’ news presented in a very compact and creative way, plus more and more exclusive and unique stories produced by entrepreneurial journalism. A newspaper with more whys than whats. A newspaper with smart and provocative news analysis. A newspaper covering new lifestyle and social trends. A newspaper full of reliable advice. A newspaper with briefings and explainers.

A newspaper with just the most relevant “cover stories” of the day. Listen to Chris Hughes, the Facebook cofounder: “We believe that there must remain space for journalism that takes time to produce and demands a longer attention span-writing that is at once nourishing and entertaining.” This must be, he says, “vigorous contextual journalism.”

A newspaper that will excel at database journalism and fact-checking. A newspaper with enlightening infographics, amazing photo essays, and unique illustrations.

A newspaper full of surprises. A collector’s paper, full of what I call caviar journalism.

Of course, this new editorial model will require new newsroom management workflows. A newsroom that works 24/7 in two different speeds and paths: a fast-cooking digital newsroom and a slow-cooking print newsroom. Both of them working in an integrated and collaborative way — interacting with readers, audiences and communities in a non-stop process where the “article” is no longer the final output, replaced by a succession of different formats and reporting styles.

This requires a new generation of content management systems, a multitasking newsroom, and planning, planning, planning. It is a great opportunity to develop explanatory journalism, strategic journalism, precision journalism, and anticipatory journalism. Journalisms that cannot be done on deadline.

In this new model, planning is a must. Perhaps 80 percent of the “day after” newspaper must be planed at least with two weeks in advance.

More than 20 years ago, I was invited by USA Today’s graphics director Richard Curtis to attend one weekly lunch with the editors of the four main sections of the paper (News, Money, Sports, and Life) where each presented the five cover stories planned one week in advance. Their experience, they told us, showed that 90 percent of the time the pre-selected stories would be published — with big breaking news of course taking priority where necessary.

A few years ago Bill Keller, then The New York Times’ executive editor, said that “stories about how we live often outweigh stories about what happened yesterday. We think it’s okay to include in our front-page portfolio something that is fun, human, or just wonderfully written. It’s part science, part art, with a little serendipity.” He added:

The notion of a Page 1 story, in fact, has evolved over the years, partly in response to the influence of other media. When a news event has been on the Internet and TV and news radio all day long, do we want to put that news on our front page the next morning? Maybe we do, if we feel our reporting and telling of it goes deeper than what has been available elsewhere. But if the factual outline — the raw information — is widely available, sometimes we choose to offer something else that plays to our journalistic advantages: a smart analysis of the events, a vivid piece of color from the scene, a profile of one of the central figures, or a gripping photograph that captures the impact of an event, instead of a just-the-facts news story.

These practices are not all new. In part, it’s doing daily what news magazines were doing weekly. And keep in mind that many successful weekend newspapers have done this for decades. These editions excel on unique, entrepreneurial journalism.

Our own experience running newspaper workshops shows that journalists are ready to master this new editorial model, and that they have enough creativity and experience to transform their papers. What they need is time to think, discuss, and create — plus some training and new talent.

I’m deliberately starting with a forecaster’s defensive tactic in predicting that the revelations from Edward Snowden’s document trove will continue well into 2014. Perhaps to the point of numbed response, we will learn more about government security and spying versus citizen rights and privacy. There are more documents with painful PowerPoint design choices to come.

tiff-fehr,jpgOngoing legal pressure by various governments on press freedoms regarding the leaked material will only add to the angles we’ll follow in 2014. Efforts like secure dropboxes for whistleblowers tied to news organizations may bring in their own stories, if public confidence is there. And don’t forget there is a new, conspicuously funded news venture around Glenn Greenwald, also tied to Snowden’s document trove.

Newsroom geeks have been instrumental in decoding the NSA story thus far. So too for corporate hacking and industrial espionage stories, as well as Bitcoin, cyberwarfare issues, and dark-web technologies. Mounting privacy and security concerns have journalists adopting encrypted communications and storage, often with guidance from the newsroom geeks because the barrier to entry is fairly high. Where does this all lead? Functional paranoia.

People’s interest in the workings of common web technologies continues to grow as we all learn more about consumer privacy violations (governmental or criminal). Non-programming web citizens are increasingly curious and concerned about the technologies under the hood of their browsers. Pairing that curiosity — and a genuine need to know — with relevant news exposés (like Snowden’s documents) and scandals (like HealthCare.gov) is a notable opportunity for geeky journalism to truly improve tech literacy on a number of fronts.

Another way in which news geeks can play a direct role in 2014’s important stories is in application design. Not our own apps, though of course we’ll build those as well. I see the upcoming midterm elections as a scrimmage for voter-targeting technologies expected in 2016’s campaigning. Building on reporting about the mismatched battle of Orca and Narwhal — the 2012 campaign names for their get-out-the-vote apps, if you recall — technology success and failure resonates with readers, speaking to web literacy and sophistication (or sophistry, depending on your viewpoint).

Campaign technology may be seen as a very small intersection of geek and wonk. Yet I’m sure 2014 will see many tightly targeted messages elude our spam filters and ad-blindness. 2012 campaign fundraising emails triggered quite a lot of curiosity (amid the irritation) about the how-to of their niche targeting. Hopefully your newsroom’s politics/campaign-finance nerds are chomping at the bit like my own colleagues.

A mobile World Cup
This is also cop-out of oracular effort: Mobile will be massive and the World Cup in Rio will be an international mobile high-water mark. Whatever your personal degree of interest in fútbol, I enjoy the quadrennial reminder that the world can set aside everything but trash-talking to focus on the World Cup. South Africa’s 2010 World Cup was big enough in America to surprise those who track mobile usage numbers. Expect Rio to have Rio-style gigantic charts. And with decent overlap between Rio and America’s daylight hours, U.S. mobile and online statistics should be fascinating.

We’ll have a warmup to Rio in the form of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi. Thankfully there’s no calendar overlap between it and World Cup to make the Internet strive for regrettable portmanteaus as we did for Thanksgiving and Hanukkah.

More math for everybody
I look forward to seeing and learning a lot more math and stats in the coming year. 2012-13 marked a heightened interest in statistical literacy across the news industry as a whole. Driven by FiveThirtyEight’s steadiness in the 2012 presidential election headwinds, today we seem to ask more questions about finding the best algorithm, model, or statistic. This extends to how we track and analyze news-reading audiences. Although sabermetric-style models could end up being the far side of the pendulum’s path compared to well-trod metrics like pageviews, I believe the complexity fits better. 2014 will see us discussing smarter subscriber vs. cost modeling when measuring the year’s new products and tweaks to industry paywalls.

Looking at the industry overall for 2014, we now have reflexive habits from Wall Street for judging every move of Facebook, Twitter, and their audiences. Stock price fluctuations operate as a very visible (often volatile) metric for those companies’ efforts to keep and increase their audience’s attention. You may find it myopic or disconnected. Or both. However, market reactions attributed as public sentiment is a thing. (I’d love to predict 2014 is the year we elect to not cite Facebook’s stock price as a verdict on each design tweak — but that’s not going to happen.)

Predicting 2014 business prospects for Twitter and Facebook requires actual chops in business forecasting that I do not have. However, I do believe we’ll see enhancements and experiments in showing more news in both platforms, with each company hoping to holding audience attention and “mature” with their consumption habits. (The “maturing” audience angle may be the most interesting of all.)

The boom in the viral-friendly packaging of news stories — aping BuzzFeed, Upworthy, and their peers — will cease to be a profitable approach as a few players lap the field. Publishers will have to differentiate by catering a product to their audience: more and better research, more thoughtful content strategy, and more experimentation and progress in the CMS space. This will manifest itself in at least the following three ways:

david-jacobs
The end of the print-vs.-app and HTML5-vs.-native debates. The correct answer is All of the Above. Content strategies that work in concert with their mediums will be ascendent. Writers need to find readers wherever they are, and as more media is produced on mobile devices and the process of consumption begins to look more and more like creation (see: Instagram, Twitter, Medium), this will become obvious.
A new analytics startup will come out of nowhere to challenge the established players. We’ve had little progress in this area since Measure Map and Urchin were sold to Google. Publications with wildly different goals and audiences are looking at the exact same analytics views. Mobile analytic systems are basically web metaphors mapped to smaller screens. Neither of these things make sense and there’s a huge opportunity here — every publisher wants better tools and stats.
Many more web and app startups. Successful properties like The Awl, The Classical, and The Magazine will encourage more and more writers to go out on their own, and there will be a new ecosystem of proofreaders, developers, and designers who support editorial work at a much more granular level. This is the global newsroom we always imagined the Internet would give us.
I would say we’re at two percent of the Internet’s potential when it comes to a true meritocracy around the flow (and financial success) of the most valuable and quality work. If all of the above happen in the next few years, we’ll be at three percent.

It’s become standard for journalists to turn to social media at times of breaking news. The raw, unfiltered stream of information can provide the first images of a dramatic event, such as the video of a bloodied suspect in the Woolwich killing this year.

ahermidaBut the past year was also marked by a backlash against the use of material on social media, fuelled by the rumours, speculation and falsehood circulating following the Boston Marathon bombings in April.

The time is now to get smarter about social media. In breaking news situations, events are in constant motion. Facts are in flux and reporting is messy. The process of sorting fact from fiction tended to happen in newsrooms, as reporters and editors assessed the veracity of the information coming in. 2014 will lay to rest any discussion of where social media fits into the news. As Boston illustrated, people want to talk about the news and share what they know or think they know. They want to be part of the news.

The marathon bombing were a stark example of how gathering, verifying, and reporting the news happens in public. The process of journalism — sourcing, filtering, contesting, and confirming information — takes place through exchanges on the network, as journalists try to be heard among the voices from law enforcement, emergency services, witnesses to the event, and those across the world reacting to the news.

The soul-searching in the media after Boston points to how journalists need to get smarter about social media in 2014. Some of the worst errors come from reporters making assumptions and jumping to conclusions. Some of the early confusion in the hunt for the bombers resulted from some news outlets talking of a suspect in custody while others talked about an arrest. In the rush to be first, mistakes will happen. The painful lesson here is to be careful to place new information in context, acknowledging the source and its reliability. Expect more media organizations to acknowledge mistakes more quickly and correct the error more openly.

Expect journalists to be more precise in their reporting, being clear about what you know but also about what they don’t know. Reporters are not trained to talk about the holes in their reporting. But in a stream of constant updates, adding notes of caution can have much value.

If there was one thing Boston told us, it is that exchanges on social media are not the equivalent of publication. It is information in flux. The conversations on Reddit were ongoing discussions where contributors collectively tried to figure out what happened and who was responsible. While some rushed to judgement, others urged caution. In 2014, expect journalists to be more careful about sourcing information from such discussion boards. Going forward, journalists are learning that rather than dismissing the chatter on social media, there is more value in engaging with it and seeking to channel the conversation unfolding online.

Journalism has to become smart. That means journalists have to understand the Internet, which is about understanding data: data about readers, trend data, contextual data, semantic data, all of it with the same goal: finding intelligent ways to approach news, the audience, and money.

mariano-blejmanNews media must change their editorial workflows and their relationship with Internet. If that concept in the United States still belongs to a small handful of digital-native publications, in Latin America, we are on the eve of a revolution that may never go through traditional media. Chances are that innovation will happen outside of the big elephants of journalism and that they will end up being sold… or who knows. So consider this piece to be more about what should happen in journalism next year and not so much about what we expect to happen in the region’s traditional media outlets.

This year, we studied a dozen successful media outlets that understood well how to generate traffic and online engagement. Some of their ideas will be implemented in Media Factory, the first news accelerator for Latin America, which will drive the growth of new media outlets in Latin America. Here are some of the concepts that we found:

Predict and detect: Traditional media have tried to predict what readers will find interesting through their own long-term experience. A variety of platforms and technologies can predict those interests more accurately. Newsrooms should integrate these tools into the workflows of editors and journalists to better understand the context in which they move and how to generate traffic.

Measurement is king: At least in Latin America, journalists are used to sitting in an office — when we have a job — and writing on the basis of ideas and discussions with colleagues or editors. Once our work is published, we lose interest in it. Outlets better at generating traffic and making decisions are obsessed with metrics: search strategies, pageviews, reading time, sharing trends. Understanding our proper audience will be disruptive at a time when the media has mostly left demographic analysis to social networks.

Always be a startup: It’s necessary for editors to be willing to change their workflow, their subjects, and the way they approach the product — to integrate software developers and design into content production. A new generation of journalists/developers is arriving, learning to use data to make decisions that can improve the quality of content, and understand that creating content is an investment.

Augment reality: Set up the newsroom in a way that the content management systems can communicate with the outside world — or other internal worlds — to increase the reality of journalistic content, through tools like semantic data, geolocation, automated data extraction, direct access to photographic services, and new digital sources detection.

Add value: The work of interactive journalism enables value-added editorial content and establishes a relationship with readers that has generated systematic increases in traffic and credibility.

The tools we use to measure the value of our journalism seem to fail us: Metrics don’t match our lofty objectives, or their innate inflexibility forces us to chase the wrong goals. They’ve proven especially vexing in the digital era, with so many available and wide disagreement over which ones ought to matter. On both the editorial and business sides of what we do, the measurements we’re using consistently seem behind the times.

elise-huBut metrics are important, because what we measure, we tend to become. Chasing ratings tilts TV news toward celebretainment. Chasing pageviews leads to annoying slideshow page reloads.

This year, the problematic pageview seemed to give way to “social lift” or some measure of sharing reach. And time on site or time reading became key proxies for the “engagement” we all seek. The innovative platform (and aggregator) Medium considers time reading its key metric. And the squishy definition of “quality” for Facebook includes “something that leads you to stay away from Facebook for awhile.”

By next year, I expect someone will crack the code of how to measure something more sophisticated: journalism’s influence, be it in civic action or cultural outcomes. Today’s metric may be time, but tomorrow’s is action.

This isn’t a new issue. Public media held “impact summits” nearly four years ago identifying the five elements we need in order to measure journalism’s impact. These days, ProPublica diligently tracks reactions to its work — their investigations follow the impact of their revelations. The Solutions Journalism Network identifies solutions or actions by design. And the Knight-Mozilla Fellowship at The New York Times is crafted specifically around figuring out how we measure the results of our work in the civic sphere. So getting to a more sophisticated metric is work that’s already well under way. 2014 could be the year we figure it out.

We’ve arrived at a choice cultural moment for an action or “impact” measurement. We have smaller, more fractured communities, highly decentralized civic involvement, and ever-personalized media. Since the link between journalism and civic action often reveals itself most clearly at the local level, the circumstances are right for a new way to measure it.

First, the community situation. On my beat, the one clear theme that’s emerged is how often connections in the cloud have fed the formation of tighter and more specific offline communities. Tomorrow’s hot communities are as narrow as “the people of Powder Mountain, Utah,” a group that came together to purchase a single mountain for the purpose of creating place around a shared ethos. Or “the people who live in one house in San Francisco” — a community of like-minded millennials who came together to build community in a house by sharing food, cars, and ideas. Local communities are becoming smaller subsets as software reorganizes the world.

At the same time, we’re also seeing civic participation get decentralized and highly personal. Ethan Zuckerman of MIT’s Center for Civic Media outlined this notion in a talk he gave at the Nieman Foundation’s 75th anniversary — arguing that when it comes to young people and digital activism, a new form of civics has taken shape. It focuses on agency, participation, and making an impact at a very small scale. “It’s rarely people saying, ‘I need to be involved in a giant wide slate of issues.’ It tends to be a very pointillist approach to involvement. It’s trying to figure out ‘How can I help economics with a single loan?’…Or giving through Donors Choose, giving to a specific campaign around a specific teacher.”

Then there’s the media moment, in which we can all create our own media — Facebook updates and beyond — and easily see the results of our participation. How is news connecting these narrowly drawn communities with their ability to make an impact? News organizations consistently do this kind of work already, notably after crises. In the wake of the Moore, Oklahoma tornado or Hurricane Sandy, news organizations become bridges between people who want to help and ways to actually help.

“We need media to step up and say: If you want to have an impact on society, if you want to be an educated citizen, we have to help you how to figure out how to be involved, and involved in a way where you can actually see the impact of what you’re doing,” Zuckerman says.

As journalism gets more one-to-one, causes become more personal, and communities divide into subsets of subsets, someone will find a metric to meet the moment. That’s my prediction, anyway. I could be way off and 2014 could be the year singing maps take over the Internet.

2013 was a big year for “stars” in the news industry — Nate Silver (and Jason Whitlock and Keith Olbermann) to ESPN, Peter King staying at Sports Illustrated to launch his spinoff site The MMQB, David Pogue (and Katie Couric) to Yahoo, Brian Stelter to CNN, and Kara Swisher, Walt Mossberg and the All Things D team leaving News Corp for Comcast-powered indie life.

dan-shanoffHere’s the issue: Your star pundit is not Nate Silver. You don’t have ESPN’s cash flow or distribution firehose or sales strategy. And if you aren’t ESPN, to try to replicate the so-called Grantland model (or the “Marquee Brothers” model, as Reuters’ Jack Shafer cheekily labeled it) — hiring a very expensive individual “brand” to run their own product, perhaps adding in the extra cost of letting them hire an entourage of editors and writers — is folly.

The star system qualifies as a bold branding move for a media company. However, between the small number of true individual stars (ones who combine entrepreneurial acumen with the ability to deliver a healthy ROI) and the constrained financial resources of most media divisions, the strategy is largely reserved for a handful of deep-pocketed media monoliths that can afford what effectively becomes a marketing expense. What about everyone else?

Forgo the star and invest in the starter.

The starter system is built on recruiting talent to work entrepreneurially — a showrunner, to compare it to pop culture — and building startup (or startup-ish) franchises and products around their strategy and ability to execute. A few advantages:

Starters are wired to think about the larger opportunity, not just their personal brand.
Starters’ efforts are scalable across more people and not leveraged on a single name.
Starters are almost always less expensive to compensate, fund, or acquire.
Starters’ initiatives come with a built-in business model rather than an incidental one.
Starters are more likely to seek out data to ask the right questions.
Starters are more likely to produce multiple wins than personal brands.
There is a bigger, more dynamic pool of starters out there than bonafide stars.
There are plenty of examples of starters in news media from the past year (or two), and if the people’s names aren’t recognizable, their companies should be:

Inside larger media companies, folks like Atlantic Media’s Kevin Delaney, Digital First’s Jim Brady, NPR’s Matt Thompson, Newsweek’s Alex Leo, my USA Today Sports colleague Jamie Mottram, The New York Times’ Aron Pilhofer, Twitter’s Geoff Reiss, and many others. In the media startup ecosystem (alphabetically listed and apologizing for glaring omissions), it’s folks like Skift’s Rafat Ali, The Awl’s Alex Balk and Choire Sicha, Vox’s Trei Brundrett, Lockhart Steele, and Alexis Juneja, Circa’s David Cohn and Anthony DeRosa, CityNotes’ Dan Frommer, MediaREDEF’s Jason Hirschhorn, Medium’s Kate Lee, The Information’s Jessica Lessin, Buzzfeed’s Jonah Peretti and Ben Smith, MediaTakeOut’s Ron Mwangaguhunga, The Toast’s Mallory Ortberg and Nicole Cliffe, PolicyMic’s Liz Plank, TheList’s Rachel Sklar and Glynnis MacNichol, serial starter Elizabeth Spiers, The Skimm’s Danielle Weisberg and Carly Zakin, NowThis News’ Katharine Zaleski, and others — including longtime industry kingpins like Gawker’s Nick Denton and Gigaom’s Om Malik.

To be sure, there is a small handful of uber-stars who combine huge personal brand and an entrepreneurial ethos — Swisher & Co, Silver, Bill Simmons. But keep in mind that in those unique cases, individual stardom was necessary but not nearly sufficient to leverage it into a full-fledged business.

The question then becomes: Where can you find starters?

Start internally. Quality starters can be sourced throughout your organization — identify internal editors and product managers who have shown a track record for starting new things, then give them the license to think up new opportunities. (This isn’t the same as handing the keys to a popular columnist or reporter; it’s a trap to conflate popularity and the ability to build a new property.)
Take advantage of the fact that entrepreneurship is increasingly popular: Put out a call for relevant new business ideas throughout the organization and modestly fund initially promising ideas with money and dedicated time for the starters to see if bigger opportunities are there. At Gannett, we run an internal innovation grant program that sees eight to ten new ideas get funded a year, in addition to the many others proposed — it gets people thinking in the right ways.

Source externally. Media companies can recruit starters from other organizations. Pay less attention (and less money) to the reporters winning prizes or earning tweeted accolades for individual stories and pay more attention to people launching products that seem to move the needle. (In a rich-get-richer example, ESPN did just that when they hired product honcho Ryan Spoon from the West Coast VC firm he was working at after founding his own startup.)
Create two internal investment groups, neither of which have to be costly.
The first group should manage a modest seed fund that leverages new platforms like AngelList to make small very early-stage investments in relevant media startups, both for the potential of the startup and, arguably more importantly, the access to exactly the kind of starters that could define your company. (This could also be the group that supports an internal grant program.)

The second group — in conjunction with your traditional corporate development group, if you have one — should be monitoring the media startup landscape for companies that are potential strategic investments or acquisitions, which brings in not just new products but the starter talent behind them.

If media companies are going to make bets under more restrictive and realistic conditions, they should recognize the inefficiency of conflating expensive star power with enterprising starter savvy. They should allocated more resources and funding to the folks whose entrepreneurial chops have the potential to scale and impact a business in a way that the stars — however individually brilliant — might not.

In the end, innovation in the news-media industry in 2014 and beyond will be driven by people who are earnestly entrepreneurial about opportunities to build something beyond their personal brand. Starters don’t generate the headlines of the stars, but they will make up many of the true stars of your organization in 2014.

A perfect storm has been brewing for 2014, but don’t worry there’s no thundersnow. It’s the data revolution that’s already ripped through e-commerce, sports, and politics, and it’s ready to sweep through news.

adrienne-debigareWe’ve already seen Big Data touch some aspects of journalistic life. There are data scientists at the Times and elsewhere focusing on reader behavior to help maintain or build readership. Trove just recently split off from The Washington Post to focus on personalized news full time. But there’s so much more we could be doing: We’re barely scratching the surface of the data that’s available for analysis. The content and experiences we might develop from the data that news organizations could gather passively from their subscribers — through the host of connected devices that the public continues to integrate into daily life — is a treasure trove of behavioral insight. All of that juicy, juicy data would allow everyone in the news pipeline — from user to advertiser — to find more value in their participation with the media landscape.

Admittedly, there are several issues with this master plan, not the least of which is the public’s concern over data privacy. In the wake of the Snowden affair, I’m sure these concerns will only continue to inflate. To put this in perspective, according to one Pew survey, people are actually more concerned with advertising agencies tracking their habits than the government.

The biggest problem with this fact is media companies are partially supported by ad dollars. The public increasingly sees advertisers as evil, shadowy villains trying to use an individual’s behavior against them, coercing them into spending their life savings on a year’s supply of diet aids or male enhancement drugs. And so, by extension, the public is wary of the media’s attitudes towards data privacy. Organizations will first have to figure out how to extract themselves from this quagmire before they can convince the public to offer up their networked behavior for predictive analysis. The good news is that studies have shown people are more likely to share more data when they are asked to opt-in and that they may actually value contextual, targeted advertising. News organizations are fighting an uphill battle in the search for meaningful data, but there is a light at the end of the tunnel.

If privacy concerns are met, the world is an organization’s data-oyster. The Internet of Things, the Quantified Self movement, wearable tech: The objects associated with these buzzwords are all now source points — along with the organization’s traditional web and mobile presence — for rich data that could yield a plethora of unknown unknowns about our subscribers. Computational social scientists are already using these kind of data to improve employee productivity, analyze disaster response, and yes, even predict that a woman is pregnant before she knows. The biggest hurdle is maintaining and continuing to build trust between the consumer and the organization.

So fast forward to the time we solve the data paradox. Media organizations are now able to use an individual’s behavior to granularly target their news experience across a range of connected devices. Subscribers are happy that they no longer have to check four different news outlets to get a comprehensive view of current events. Their data isn’t being broadcast or sold to the highest bidder, and they know it. Maybe they’re even allowed to opt-in to levels of data sharing! The ads consumers must see (because everyone is well aware that advertising is inescapable) are offered contextually and at times that are useful to them. And advertisers are happy, because the likelihood of each impression becoming a click has skyrocketed, even if the ads are being shown less often and in fewer places. It’s a venerable newstopia!

Obviously, this is a vast oversimplification of a fair data future, but reality may not end up looking much different. The bottom line is that our future as an industry lies in our ability to tap into the resources and empirical insights that Big Data offers without eroding the trust of our users. It’s a tall order, but absolutely achievable if we’re willing to be take our place as innovators.

The emerging field of digital journalism has been subjected to intense scrutiny over the past decade. This scrutiny has often focused on the ways in which digital is different than print and broadcast journalism — with the differences usually portrayed as shortcomings.

henry-blodgetSometimes, the criticism has been fair. A lot of early experiments in digital journalism produced experiences that were not informative or helpful for readers. Because the economics necessary to support high-quality digital news production had not yet developed, moreover, few digital newsrooms had the scale necessary to produce it consistently.

In recent years, however, most of digital’s early shortcomings have been overcome. And the field is now developing into a rich, deep, and extraordinarily versatile way to keep the world informed.

Companies like BuzzFeed, Vox Media, Gawker Media, Huffington Post, Business Insider (my employer!), and the digital divisions of some traditional publications now have big editorial budgets, and they are using them to produce and distribute digital stories that hundreds of millions of readers love. Importantly, these stories are designed for digital, not for print or television. They are not square pegs shoved in round holes.

Over the history of media, each new medium has developed its own “native” forms of journalistic storytelling. Story formats in TV and radio evolved to be entirely different than those in newspapers and magazines. In the early years of television, print journalism looked down on TV journalism, dismissing it as a playground for those who couldn’t report or write well enough to make it in print. Over several decades, however, TV journalism evolved to become totally different than print — and even more influential.

Similarly, digital journalism is evolving to be markedly different than print and television journalism. And it is the newsrooms that are embracing these differences, as opposed to fighting them, that are growing and innovating as the medium develops.

How is digital different? A thousand small ways, but three big ones:

Different editorial approach (from news gathering to storytelling to production)
Different distribution (multiple screens, software distribution instead of hard papers and pipes)
Different cost structure (digital economics cannot support print or TV — but they can support digital)
Over the next few decades, digital journalism will continue to grow and evolve rapidly, with today’s mid-sized newsrooms expanding to become global newsrooms of hundreds or even thousands of journalists. The depth of digital reporting and storytelling — both narrative and visual — will continue to grow, as will the precision with which publications customize their story selections for each reader.

So what will 2014 bring? This, I think, will be the year in which most observers begin to fully appreciate digital’s differences — and why these differences should be celebrated, not feared or criticized. Digital is by far the most versatile and convenient journalism technology human beings have ever developed. And with global social media, digital publishing, and digital newsrooms finally hitting their stride, the world has never been better informed.

To get a sense of how we will consume news, information and entertainment in the future, I only need to look at my son Jack, age two and a half. While my wife and I do our best to limit his screen time and steer him towards offline pursuits like jigsaw puzzles and coloring, he already has favorite shows, apps, and digital activities.

etan-horowitzThere are three things that describe the way Jack likes and expects to consume media: on-demand, personalized, and available seamlessly on any screen.

If Jack wants to watch the PBS show Curious George, he can watch it on cable on-demand, on Amazon Instant, on Netflix, on YouTube, or on iTunes. And he can watch it on any of these platforms on our TVs, computers, phones, tablets, or through devices that connect to our TV like Apple TV or Google’s Chromecast. And because we watch on all these services, when we pull one up, we never have to hunt around for what we want — because all of our favorites are right there in our digital library, watchlist, instant queue, or viewing history. The Curious George brand also extends to thousands of other products and platforms, like the Curious About Shapes and Colors app, one of Jack’s favorites.

This on-demand, personalized, and any-screen experience also extends to communication. If he wants to have a video chat with his grandparents in Philadelphia or Boston, we can do it via Skype or FaceTime, on our TV, computer, or tablet. And if we’re not home, we can do the same on our phones.

To prepare for consumers like Jack who expect to access personalized news, information, and entertainment instantly on any screen, here are two predictions for 2014.

More personalized mobile alerts: The mobile app alert is perhaps the most intimate of all forms of news delivery, as information is sent directly to your pocket regardless of where you are or what you are doing. Since it is so personal, consumers only want to receive alerts that are relevant to them. Sports apps like ESPN’s ScoreCenter and Bleacher Report’s Team Stream have been doing this for a while, but in 2013 we saw news organizations including NBC’s Breaking News and ABC introduce some form of personalized mobile app alerts. We also saw the growth of startup Circa, whose entire mission is built around personalized alerts and news. Expect to see many more news organizations allow their users to personalize the mobile alerts they receive in 2014.
Favorite content in unfamiliar places: For the past few years, we’ve found our favorite media brands in a few familiar places — newspapers in print, online, and mobile, or TV stations on TV, online, mobile. But just like Jack expecting to find the Pixar movie Cars on whatever device or screen is in front of him, consumers will increasingly expect to find their favorite media brands on new devices and platforms. And they will expect to be able to watch their favorite programming both live and on demand.
The biggest place this trend played out in 2013 was on Apple’s Apple TV set top box. Apple TV has always had a few news and entertainment channels, but they ramped up their offerings dramatically this year with the addition of HBO GO, WatchESPN, SkyNews, Watch ABC, Bloomberg, PBS, Disney, the Weather Channel, and more. Some of these channels, such as HBO GO, require consumers to have a cable subscription to watch shows and movies, while others allow users to watch without a cable subscription. And many allow consumers to create watch lists or favorites so they can immediately access personalized lists of programming.

This trend also accelerated in 2013 with the introduction of an inexpensive Apple TV competitor from Google called Chromecast. While its content offerings pale in comparison to Apple TV, they are growing and there’s even a Chromecast channel from an old media brand — PostTV from The Washington Post. And don’t forget the Roku box, which boasts that it has “more news than any other streaming player.”

In 2014, we will see more news organizations making their content available on devices such as Apple TV, Chromecast, and Roku and we will also likely see news content starting to pop up in wearables like smartwatches and perhaps even smart appliances. The result will be that when consumers want to watch the latest show from CNN and or read a favorite columnist, they’ll just have to reach for whatever Internet connected device is nearest to them.

2014 is going to be the year of a big debate about what news is — and especially about whether and how news organizations can ethically report on activity in the virtual world.

felix-salmonThe first time I saw this debate take place in public was in October, on Nick Denton’s Kinja commenting platform, where a fascinating conversation broke out between Denton, the founder of Gawker Media; John Cook, the editor of Gawker; and Neetzan Zimmerman, the viral wunderkind who singlehandedly generates most of Gawker’s traffic. Zimmerman had put up yet another of his dozen posts a day, all of which feature (which is to say, recycle) various pieces of content found on the internet. This post was headlined “Grandpa Writes Letter Disowning Daughter After She Disowns Gay Son,” and featured a letter which Zimmerman found on a gay-friendly t-shirt site named FCKH8.

Denton quickly jumped into the comments, saying there was something fishy about the way in which FCKH8 kept on finding such heartwarming letters; he also pointed out that the company’s founder, Luke Montgomery, has a long history of “stunts.”

Cook replied to Denton:

Part of our job is to make sure we’re writing about things that people are talking about on the internet, and the incentive structure of this company is organized to make sure that we are on top of things that are going viral. Neetzan is explicitly tasked with doing so. Unfortunately, that involves covering charlatans and bullshit artists, whether it’s Montgomery or Jimmy Kimmel…

I’d rather be calling bullshit on stuff like this than calling attention to it…But we are tasked both with extending the legacy of what Gawker has always been — ruthless honesty — and be reliably and speedily on top of internet culture all while getting a shit-ton of traffic. Those goals are sometimes in tension.

Zimmerman, who’s surely one of the world’s greatest experts on viral content, then replied to them both, pointing out that the tension was even bigger than that:

Most viral content demands from its audience a certain suspension of disbelief.

The fact is that viral content warehouses like BuzzFeed trade in unverifiable schmaltz exactly because that is the kind of content that goes viral.

People don’t look to these stories for hard facts and shoe-leather reporting. They look to them for fleeting instances of joy or comfort. That is the part they play in the Internet news hole.

In other words, there’s things which are true on the internet — like that letter from a disappointed grandpa, or a video of a failed twerk. The Internet is getting increasingly good at generating such content — so good, indeed, that the bar is getting raised, and the chances of successfully viral content simply emerging naturally from the world are getting ever slimmer. There’s now so much fake content out there, much of it expertly engineered to go viral, that the probability of any given piece of viral content being fake has now become pretty high.

The result is stories like this one, in The New York Times, headlined “If a Story Is Viral, Truth May Be Taking a Beating,” which says that “digital news sites are increasingly blurring the line between fact and fiction”:

When the tales turned out to be phony, the modest hand-wringing that ensued was accompanied by an admission that viral trumps verified — and that little will be done about it as long as the clicks keep coming…

…Gawker, BuzzFeed, The Huffington Post and Mashable among them — do not see invented viral tales as being completely at odds with the serious new content they publish alongside them.

The Times story even quotes Elan Gale, who hoaxed the internet with his Thanksgiving plane-ride tweets, saying that the people who embedded and Storified his tweets were “deceiving their audience” by doing so. The appeal of the moral high horse appears to be irresistible: Look at Dave Weigel, for instance, tearing into BuzzFeed for their rebroadcast of the Gale tweets, calling it “the sort of shoddy reporting that would get a reporter at a small newspaper fired.”

What Weigel misses — and even Gale too, it would seem — is that the BuzzFeed story is not a journalist reporting about happenings on a plane. “Someone is rude on a plane” is not a news story. The BuzzFeed story is rather a journalist reporting about happenings on the Internet — specifically, on Twitter. Here’s how BuzzFeed CEO Jonah Peretti sees his publication:

I think of BuzzFeed as this platform that enables us to understand how people are sharing and distributing things like entertainment content, journalism, branded content, all these various types of content that we distribute on this platform that we built…

What we’ve found is that content spreads on different networks for different reasons. There are underlying human dynamics for social content. There are reasons why people share.

This is where the tensions come in: The reasons that people share basically have nothing to do with whether or not the thing being shared is true. If your company was built from day one to produce stuff which people want to share, then that will always end up including certain things which aren’t true. That’s not a problem if you’re ViralNova, whose About page says “We aren’t a news source, we aren’t professional journalists, and we don’t care.” But it becomes a problem if you put yourself forward as practitioners of responsible journalism, as BuzzFeed does.

It has become abundantly clear over the course of 2013 that if you want to keep up in the traffic wars, you need to have viral content. News organizations want to keep up in the traffic wars, and so it behooves them to create viral content — Know More is a really good example. But the easiest and most infectious way to get enormous amounts of traffic is to simply share the stuff which is going to get shared anyway by other sites. Some of that content will bear close relation to real facts in the world; other posts won’t. And there are going to be strong financial pressures not to let that fact bother you very much.

Indeed, that fact doesn’t bother me very much. I very much love Analee Newitz’s “valley of ambiguity“:

original.jpg

It seems to me that if a site has a bunch of viral content, and some of it is on the left-hand side of the valley and some of it is on the right-hand side of the valley, then it’s entirely reasonable to apply journalistic strictures to the right-hand side but not to the left-hand side.

It’s also possible, if Facebook really does start cracking down on the left-hand side of this valley, that the incentive to create fake viral memes will naturally dissipate. But that’s not going to happen in 2014. So expect, over the course of the coming year, a large quantity of debate about questions like whether it even makes sense to fact-check a twerking video.

My undergraduate philosophy thesis was about the semantics of belief ascription, and the way in which “Lois Lane believes Superman can fly” is true, and “Lois Lane believes Clark Kent can fly” is false, even though Superman is Clark Kent. I think this debate is similar: When you point to a twerking video, are you pointing to the video, or are you pointing to the actions which take place in the video? BuzzFeed says it’s doing the first kind of pointing, which means that it’s true, while the likes of Dave Weigel see instead the second kind of pointing, which means that it’s false. To a large degree, this is a discussion which only journalists, and maybe the occasional underemployed philosopher, could ever care about. But it’s going to be hard to avoid in 2014.

Update: In fact, you can fact-check a twerking video.

What might 2014 bring for the world of news? Lacking a crystal ball, we can look forward by making sense of the year that is coming to a close. This analysis — and not wide-eyed wishes — helps us think critically about the future.

pablo-boczkowskiIn my opinion, two major events marked 2013 for news and journalism. The first was the sale of The Boston Globe by The New York Times Company to sports mogul John Henry for $70 million in cash. The Times had acquired the Globe for $1.1 billion in 1993, “the highest ever [price paid] for an American newspaper” until then, according to a story in The New York Times.

That’s a loss of 93 percent value in absolute terms in just 20 years. A more accurate calculation taking into account consumer price index increases reveals that the Times lost 96 cents on the dollar with this investment. (To put things in financial perspective, the Dow Jones Industrial Average more than quadrupled during this period. And this calculation doesn’t even take into account the Worcester Telegram & Gazette, which was purchased separately for $295 million but included in the $70 million sales price.)

This staggering loss of value is a parable of the failure of established news organizations to take advantage of the opportunities that arose during the first couple of decades of the digital age. If the Globe were located in an economically depressed part of the country, one might be able to argue that the loss could be due to local economic factors. But Boston is a hub of innovation in biotechnology and information technology, two of the main engines of economic growth in recent history.

Purchased at top price and with great fanfare at the time Mosaic was paving the way for more sophisticated graphical user interfaces and the commercialization of the then-nascent World Wide Web was about to explode, the sale of the Globe is resounding evidence that these news organizations are not among the winners of the first decades of the digital age.

Among those winners, however, there is eBay, the online auction giant. Its founder, Pierre Omidyar, became a lead character in the second event that marked 2013 for the world of news when he announced this fall his decision to invest $250 million in the creation of a new media venture with Glenn Greenwald as the front person.

For me, what makes this development so noteworthy in the context of what 2014 might bring is the way in which it was received by the news industry. Article after article, media analysts greeted the news with hyped expectations and an uncritical tone. For an occupation that is proud of its skeptical attitude, this reception is quite paradoxical. For instance, in case the reader would not go beyond the first scroll and the headline did not make the author’s take clear, the lede in a Columbia Journalism Review article headlined “The Extraordinary Promise of the new Greenwald + Omidyar Venture,” states “Adversarial muckrakers + civic-minded billionaire = a whole new world.”

When I started researching online news back in the mid-1990s, there was talk of the “new economy.” We know how that went. It now seems the economy is not enough and we got ourselves a “whole new world.”

Resorting to a saving development or a killer app has been a common pattern for news organizations since the dawn of the digital age. (Remember when Rupert Murdoch declared the iPad the vehicle to reinvent newspapers — only to close The Daily less than two years after its launch, tired of bleeding millions?)

What is so telling about the reception of the Omidyar/Greenwald venture is the sad yet implicit recognition that market dynamics will not support public service journalism to the extent that we got used to during the twentieth century. Surely $250 million will go a long way, and I personally look forward to reading the coverage that will come of out this new venture. But nonmarket solutions will not scale up to generate a new “golden era” of journalism that is comprehensive and local enough for a country as vast and complex as the United States.

An attempt to scale it up might not be socially desirable anyway: With so many systemic problems in this country and the world that remain chronic under current market dynamics (infant mortality, disease prevention, global warming, and so on), what is the ethical justification for investing a growing portion of philanthropic resources in the news?

So if 2013 has brought us two powerful reminders of the market failures of high quality and public-service journalism in the digital age, then what might we expect for 2014? Economically strapped and disheartened after years of losing ground, leading news organizations might finally begin paying more attention to what the public does and deliver services and products to meet it where it is at. But what is it that the public wants and what will be the consequences of catering to their preferences?

An analysis of more than 50,000 stories from 20 leading news sites in seven different countries shows two clear and consistent patterns of information preferences among the public: a lower level of interest in public affairs news in comparison to what the media consider newsworthy, and the prevalence of tried-and-true storytelling formats.

A contrast between the most newsworthy stories (those that make it to the top of a site’s homepage) and the most viewed stories on each of these sites reveals a gap of almost 20 percentage points across sites, with journalists highlighting substantially more public affairs news than the stories that the audience clicks most often.

For the final assignment of this fall’s undergraduate seminar in the sociology of online news at Northwestern University, I asked my students to undertake an analysis of the media’s and the public’s preferences on two sites of their choosing over a three-day period. When we debriefed their findings, there was a recurrent two-word answer: Paul Walker.

This divergence in the information preferences of the media and the public is not new. Over the past several decades, journalists, consultants, and academics have championed a number of storytelling solutions to overcome this divergence, from softening the news to turning the public into co-producers of content.

But what does the public want? The answer is again two words: straight news. A concise and straightforward rendition of the main facts is the format of the majority of the most popular stories in the sample, with feature-style storytelling coming in a distant second place.

What about the appeal of the harbingers of the brave new world of the Web 2.0? Virtually nonexistent. One in 100 of the stories placed at the top of the homepage were contributed by users. That’s not a lot in absolute terms, but it is ten times greater than the interest of the public in the stories contributed by their fellow readers: only one in 1,000 of the most popular stories were user-generated content.

Endeavors like CNN’s iReport might seem an attractive way for news organizations to appear cutting edge, but the public does not gravitate towards them.

Would giving the public more of what they want and less of what they need in order to function as informed members of the citizenry be good for society at large? Increasing the proportion of brief straight news stories and decreasing the resources devoted to soft news, longform reportage, blogs, and user-generated content will not likely have negative societal consequences.

But a substantive decrease in the provision of public affairs reportage might. Public deliberation and political participation benefit from the supply of a steady and generous dose of public affairs news. Sometimes what we want is not what is necessarily good for us.

Junk food might satiate our appetite, but is bad for our health. Stuffing our news diet with sports, weather, crime, and entertainment stories might give us engaging topics of conversation, while also having negative effects on the health of our body politic. But when the market talks loud and clear while profits decline, it might be really hard not to hear.

In sum, the year ahead might bring news organizations that will pay more attention to the public. While that might be good for their bottom lines, it might also be bad for the quality of our democratic life.

The year 2014 is going to be all about you. And me. And him and her. It’s going to be all about all of us — and what we are doing on all our devices. The job in news is to be exactly there for people, no matter what they’re doing or where they’re doing it, to take advantage of their platforms and deliver the best journalism we can for that device — what I call adaptive journalism.

cory-haikAdaptive journalism accounts for everything — your device and its potential (accelerometer, anyone?), your live environment (Sunday night couch with a tablet? smartphone at the airport?), where you clicked or tapped from (social? washingtonpost.com?), or even where you’re going next (want to switch devices? or couches? airports?)

This won’t be easy, but there’s payoff for everyone: users, publishers, manufacturers, advertisers. It’s a return to storytelling with a device-first sensibility. One of crafting news and news experiences that put the user first. The most exciting part is that it gives room for experimentation — demands it, in fact. Show me the digital journalists who don’t want that as part of their mission and I’ll tell them they’re in the wrong business. Next year is going to be the greatest year yet to work in digital news and it’s going to be because of a rush to adaptive journalism.

Wait for it…anticipatory news
By paying attention to personal data and preferences that users self-select, news organizations will have a wealth to offer. The moment is now to re-up your newsroom geotagging and metadata efforts. Not because we expect that a reader will drill down to a subsection for “hyperlocal” news — rather because passive data sharing is allowing us to literally anticipate a user’s next move. Jane just landed in Washington, D.C. at 6 p.m. on a Thursday. Her calendar, which she shares with us, says so. She’s staying in Georgetown. Here are the restaurants from the 2013 Fall Dining Guide that she won’t want to miss. They’re tailored to her because Jane has read and shared food content before. But first, tell the cabbie not to take Key Bridge — it’s closed for the next three hours. Jane’s in New York the next day — there’s a meeting on her calendar at 10 a.m. in midtown. We’ll put the story about the dreaded nor’easter at the top of her reading stack. Also the piece about the FTC hearing on native advertising, because Jane’s meeting is with an advertising agency.

Small screen gives the biggest gifts
The desktop Internet gave news organizations potential for unprecedented scale, for exciting new user participation, for live delivery of news around the clock — and on and on. But the small screen — the devices in your hand, on your wrists — does all of that and more. The forward-thinking digital newsroom must be considering the specific capabilities of these devices and create stories with those capabilities. For example, during last year’s inauguration, The Washington Post produced a panoramic photo of the event specifically for smartphones. The navigation of the photo relied on the device’s gyroscope. This is taking advantage of the “gifts of the device.” The Post just ran a big package around “Super Zips” — the clusters in America with the wealthiest Zip codes. If you came to us on mobile, and opted into sharing your location, we gave you the Super Zips around you first.

Watch out!
Wearable tech: It’s still early, and it’s still not as fashionable as some of us would like — but it’s real. Someone is going to build the Snapchat for news on a watch next year. It’s the perfect platform for delivering the moment, the now. Cards are all the rage. Just look at how we’ve built projects over the last year: Twitter, news orgs, apps — they’re all broken into consumable cards with aesthetically pleasing visuals and atomic pieces of information. These work well for watches and your new small screens to come.

Second screen first
We’ve all spent evenings with friends and family in parallel play — where folks are sitting in close quarters, in a shared space, but each person is on his or her personal device. The television sits idly in the center of the room. Voices pop up occasionally: “Have you seen…” Then three folks gather around a tablet or phone for a collective moment. Things like Apple’s AirPlay, Google’s Chromecast, or a good ol’ HDMI connection allow for viewing on the big screen — the television. This will become your next desktop. The family desktop. News organizations need to think about how they can tap into creating experiences there — how to gather folks around. On-demand video is one way, but that’s simply the beginning. Put a team on this, stat.

FOMO no ‘mo
We all live in some version of Fear Of Missing Out. News organizations’ role has always been to help you with this. It’s just gotten a lot harder; the cycle can be insidious. And social media has created an entirely new hypercycle that rings around the news constantly. In 2014, you will see more of that ringing baked into the actual products of new organizations. Especially, and here is the adaptive journalism piece, if you are coming from social. This is something the publisher can easily detect; social referral traffic is up across the board. Users come to news links because they want to verify breaking information — they want to learn more about what they are seeing in the stream. This also works the other way: Users, on what I would call primary sites such as The Washington Post, are reading the story first, but then they want to learn more about the social conversation. These are the social stories that are spun off. Publishers are going to be offering this in more than a Twitter feed or aggregation: This will and should be a platform play.

Native product is the new native advertising
It’s not just the content a publisher or brand puts in an allotted “sponsored news” hole that makes it valuable — it’s also the where and how. The medium is the message. Converse launched a campaign recently on Complex, a beautiful parallax scroller built with inline media. It’s using the same tools, platform, and storytelling techniques as editorial — more native product than native advertising. The Post did this with Land Rover with the launch of our experimental editorial product, Topicly. The custom platform that editorial content flowed into — that was built as an out-there cutting-edge product — those same design and presentation tools to create were given over to the brand. Clearly labeled, same rules of content, and all that good stuff. We’re going to see more of this. In an era of adaptive journalism, this is the adaptive advertising piece and it’s more about platform than it is about content.

Many of the things I’ve mentioned are in the works or have a proof-of-concept floating around. They are combinations of editorial enterprise, user behavior, technology, design, and yes, the world of advertising. Now is the time to push the boundaries and use the best of those worlds in the service of storytelling. Here’s to breaking innovative ground in 2014 at the same time we’re breaking news — adaptively.

Our journalism business never ceases to provide surprises and fodder for speculation — that’s what makes this year-end round of prediction posts so much fun and, often, so far off base. For example, none of the Lab’s prognosticators a year ago predicted that one billionaire would toss $250 million into a business that has been dying for years, while another would pony up the same sum to launch an as-yet un-named and largely mysterious “new mass media organization.”

martin-langeveldSo the big question is what will these gentlemen bring to the table besides money — in particular, can they find business models around digital news that have so far eluded everyone else?

As the economy started pulling itself out of the doldrums a few years ago, some like the Lab’s Ken Doctor expected the newspaper industry to undergo broader consolidation — a “roll-up,” in Doctor’s words — of the kind long sought by MediaNews founder Dean Singleton and others. My question at the time was whether it would truly be a roll-up (a consolidation toward strength derived from national network efficiencies and opportunities, like the consolidations in the radio industry) or a mop-up — a sweeping-up of cheap, obsolete assets, with a strategy of squeezing the final years of cash flow out of them.

The expectation was that with easier credit, major newspaper groups might find the financial backing needed to merge, acquire, and swap assets in order to build stronger regional and national groups and to make the necessary R&D investments to build toward their digital future. But with cash still hard to come by, we’ve seen few steps of that kind.

Instead, most of the action in the newspaper business has come from billionaires and near-billionaires getting into the game. They’ve included legendary investor Warren Buffett (whose BH Media Group has picked up 28 local newspapers and about 40 other titles in 10 states for $344 million), money manager and Red Sox owner John Henry (who dropped $70 million on The Boston Globe), greeting-card magnate Aaron Kushner (Freedom Communications including The Orange County Register), and Amazon founder Jeff Bezos ($250 million for The Washington Post).

Are these investments roll-ups, mop-ups, or something else?

Buffett’s real strategy
I think Warren Buffett is really pursuing a mop-up strategy. He says otherwise, of course: “Wherever there is a pervasive sense of community, a paper that serves the special informational needs of that community will remain indispensable to a significant portion of its residents.” What else is he going to say? He may actually believe this, and believe that printed newspapers will remain viable for a long time, and may prefer to read news on paper like most people in his generation. But Buffett’s backup strategy is this: He is buying newspaper assets cheap and not investing much into them, in the expectation that even if they lose all value over the next 6 or 8 years, he will have made a decent return on his investment.

Interestingly, this is precisely the strategy that Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway followed in the 1930s through 1950s, under the control of the Chace family of Providence, before Buffett bought what was left of it beginning in 1962. At the time, he just needed a company — any company — that was publicly traded and easy to get control of to use as a vehicle for his investment strategy. The Chaces had seen the textile business move south; they mopped up in New England, buying mills and consolidating equipment to milk whatever cash could be extracted. (And as it happens, they lucked out more than the luckiest lottery winner, because they retained a minority share after Buffett’s arrival that’s now worth hundreds of millions.) After gaining control of the company in 1965, Buffett continued the textile sector mop-up, finally closing the last mill in 1969.

So here’s Prediction No. 1: Warren Buffett will continue buying newspapers wherever he can do so very cheaply. No grand strategy, no new business models for news will emerge from Omaha. Ultimately, these papers will be closed or sold. It’s a mop-up.

Philanthropic journalism
The other billionaire news tycoons, including eBay founder Pierre Omidyar, are obviously neither rollers-up nor moppers-up. They are motivated by something else. Undoubtedly, they’d love to make some money on their investments. But for most of them, what they are putting at risk is small potatoes compared to their net worth. (In Bezos’s case, his initial Post investment comes to less than 1 percent of his net worth. It’s like the rest of us buying a cheap used car. Conceivably, we might make a buck by selling it later on at a profit — but we really don’t care.)

Here’s why they do it: These folks are motivated by pretty much the same philanthropic impulse that motivated many newspaper barons during much of the 20th century. The barons’ business model was that if merchants wanted to get their messages out, newspaper advertising was pretty much the only game in town. As a bonus, people were willing to pay for single copies or home delivery, which covered all the printing and distribution costs. Profit margins ranged as high as 50 percent. News was at the heart of the “product” (you were not supposed to call it that in the newsroom), but news didn’t pay for itself. News was a gift to the community, a bit of philanthropy on the part of the news barons, just like the museums, libraries, opera houses, and schools built and endowed by others in the moneyed class. The quality of one’s newsroom was a way to flaunt wealth and demonstrate generosity while also enriching the community.

We’re now seeing a 21st-century version of that same philanthropic motivation, probably coupled with some hubris — the kind that says, “Even though nobody else has found a way to make this business work, I can, because I’ve started and fixed a lot of other businesses.”

It’s hard to find a parallel to this phenomenon in other legacy businesses that got disrupted. No tycoons that I know of got into the horse-drawn carriage business, the typewriter business, or the photographic film business once those businesses started their slide. The closest parallel I can think of is railroads.

Railroads were historically prone to boom and bust cycles and wild speculation, and were all pretty much on the ropes in the 1970s due to disruption by cars, trucks, and airplanes. Since then, the industry has done pretty well (on the freight side) and attracted various well-heeled investors, including Buffett (BNSF), Phil Anschutz (Union Pacific), Forrest Mars (Tongue River Railroad), PayPal founder Elon Musk (Hyperloop proposal), Bill Ackman (Canadian Pacific). But it’s not a real parallel, since the railroad business model didn’t really need total reinvention.

Mostly, the media investments by tycoons other than Buffett spring simply from what they see as an interesting, potentially lucrative and very public entrepreneurial challenge, at which they think they can succeed — even if they have no idea, initially, what the solution may be. Basically, they think, if newspapers were a license to print money for 100 years, and if there’s still a huge appetite out there for news, there has to be a way to do that digitally, even if nobody has really been able to figure one out in the last two decades.

And so, Prediction No. 2: We will continue to see some laudable investments in journalism by very wealthy people — but in the near term, we will not see real, transformative business models coming from them. Instead, these investments are laudable simply because, following that philanthropic impulse, they generally add more journalists, improve the product, and make communities happy to have a good newspaper. We’ll probably see some more super-rich people jumping into the game, perhaps acquiring the papers like the Worcester Telegram & Gazette (being split from the Globe by John Henry), and the Providence Journal (being jettisoned by A. H. Belo).

The Omidyar thing
Finally, we come to the mystery that is Pierre Omidyar’s $250 million gamble and his hiring of Glenn Greenwald (effectively acquiring the motherlode of Edward Snowden secrets), along with Laura Poitras and Jay Rosen. Of all the current big-money players, I think Omidyar may have the best prospects.

Thus, Prediction No. 3: Even though nothing much has leaked out about what shape this venture is going to take, I’m predicting that what we’re going to see is a global news system (not a just a website), combining the best features of The Texas Tribune, GlobalPost, and the investigative news networks. There will be news digests if you just want to know what’s going on; there will be personalized news streams if you have a set of niche interests; there will be longform journalism, great photography, and video. The idea will be to build a global community around news that matters. There may be spinoffs like books and events. It will be a for-profit venture, but like Google, Facebook, Twitter, et al, it will not unveil any real revenue strategy for several years. The focus will be to build an audience first.

The best parallel to the “Omidyar thing” is probably Ted Turner’s launch of CNN in 1980 (which only cost the equivalent of around $70 million in today’s moolah, giving an idea of the magnitude of Omidyar’s gamble). CNN was a brand new model, it was global, it was disruptive, and it hired great people. It took five full years to become profitable. So give Pierre a chance — this may take a while.

Let’s make it clear from the start that the new year will not bring final resolution to the hot pursuit of a methodology for determining impact. Nor will we find a solid new business model to ease the pressures brought by having to deliver sharper content across more platforms and, it seems, with greater speed than ever before. Not yet. But public media is well past its crossroads, and far enough along some new paths that we’re able to see patterns emerge.

sue-schardtWe remain, in 2014, in a prolonged period of disruption. For some, it’s a time to invent and thrive. Others are eager to move back into a new phase of predictability, when we’ve locked down new models for generating, distributing, and monetizing our work. My basic advice for now is: It’s okay! We’re exactly where we’re supposed to be! Relish this time of uncertainty. It won’t last forever. Stretch out. Be different than you’ve been before.

There are many angles for looking into a crystal ball. Mine is based on a series of experiments I’ve led since 2008 designed to tap our brightest talent to disrupt the public media system, reveal new approaches to journalism and storytelling, and lay new pathways to Americans not currently served by public media.

What’s come into focus is a new and promising vision of a public media network comprised of 1,200 community hubs, each with a distinctive culture and an exciting opportunity to form a new relationship with more citizens. And we have another important network — of talent, individuals who operate with greater flexibility and capacity for experimentation than legacy institutions full up with day-to-day operations. AIR’s talent network is rooted in audio, but it’s expanding almost as quickly as the technology that is driving so much of our change. Yes, they are our reporters, hosts, and editors. But this network, 1,000 strong across 46 states and 25 countries, now also includes technologists, social media experts, podcasters — more than 60 job titles in all. Above all, our makers are skilled collaborators who bring agency to one another, and to institutions seeking to adapt and thrive.

With that, here are five pivot points to look for in 2014:

Talent on the move. The value of crafty makers will rise, especially in top markets and at stations with a strong local production culture in place. Stations and distributors will move assertively to become platforms for the best and brightest from within their organizations. They’ll compete to attract outside talent. And we’ll see new moves to aggregate talent into podcast networks, more experiments with crowdsourced fundraising, and more talent cutting loose from their stations and networks to start their own enterprises.
Local communities, local stations forming a new frontier for experimentation, and expanding public media service to more Americans. As we continue to work to build and strengthen the legacy network model built around national programming, principally Morning Edition and All Things Considered, there will be exciting new work underway in local communities fueled by new investment. This will give rise to new collaboration between local stations across the country. We will begin to see fresh faces and hear new and unexpected voices on public media platforms that will grow over time.
Strategic investment in building capacity, not only for digital, but for “street” infrastructure. In the decades before consolidation of commercial radio, it was common for a local radio station’s staff to be out every weekend in their remote van, broadcasting from strip mall parking lots, or carnivals, or little league baseball games. We’ll see a return to this past, with a small but meaningful number of public media stations following the lead of MapJam at Austin’s KUT to create live events to reach new citizens, or establishing new access points for their stations à la La Burbuja at KCRW in L.A., or launching new community journalism projects imitating Curious City in Chicago.
What’s old is new. Besides stations moving to create physical platforms of interaction with more citizens, we’ll see producers and stations engaged in field research to better inform digital strategies — and more discipline and intention behind figuring out how to turn the available tools of technology in the right direction. As we move from summer into fall, knowledge sharing among stations, producers, and networks will begin to flourish. A celebration of good old-fashioned shoe leather is in our future.
What’s small is big. We’ll be excited and inspired by what programs and producers are able to do with micro-scale visibility — tens of thousands of podcast listeners, for example, versus a tens-of-millions broadcast audience. By the end of the year, we’ll have become more shrewd with our expectations, but for the first half of 2014, expect to see played out the continuing “gold rush” for new business models that tie together crowdsourcing, new distribution platforms, mobile apps, and new approaches to digitally aggregated media.
As we move through this period of invention, remember that progress is usually made up a series of small, sustained nudges over time. There is no magic bullet, no holy grail. It will be at least 10 years for the seeds we’re now planting to blossom. Keep digging, and keep your eyes open for the green shoots that start to appear.

Predictions! Change, the poets say, is the only constant. But I think that we’re going to see several slow-moving trends solidify rather than another Big Disruption in 2014.

reyhan-harmanciSocial media, for instance, will continue to dominate discussion of both how news is reported and disseminated. BuzzFeed, of course, exists at this intersection: It is what people are talking about, and then it reports on what people are talking about. For my organization, a new media company called Modern Farmer, this means that we will continue to remain sutured to our phones and computers, trying to stay on top of Facebook algorithm changes (which seem to be about to undergo the same sort of fundamental shift Google’s did with Panda in 2011) and begging Twitter to verify us. As a publisher, it means using more and more analytic tools to zero in on who is sharing what content. (Google Analytics’ new demographic information should be helpful, and should make companies like ComScore and BlueKai nervous.) The why will likely remain mysterious, because humans are weird.

Print media, online media, audio, events, books, pop-up stores — extensions of brands — will all get even more jumbled, in a good way. It’s fun to think about how a story could live as an event, as part of a digital package, as a data app, etc. At Modern Farmer, we got really excited at the news that Pitchfork would be doing a print quarterly. We have a print quarterly and I feel strongly that there is value in a physical product. (It still commands ad revenue, for starters.) But for us, the print quarterly is only the beginning. The most successful media companies have figured out how to translate their core ideas into any number of forms (think Vice and video or Rookie and its yearbook).

Another slow-moving change is the developing relationship between institutional media brands and individual employees. At one point, the conventional wisdom seemed to dictate that media brands would be subsumed by personal brands — that The New York Times would just be a collection of “voices” like The Huffington Post. But now that The Huffington Post has made its persona-driven blog content only part of its larger staffed enterprise, it seems that these two models are not a binary split. You can love Bill Simmons but go to Grantland for Katie Baker’s New York Times wedding power rankings (as I do.) I doubt Nate Silver will be sticking his face next to every FiveThirtyEight post. At Modern Farmer, we are less interested in elevating any particular writer as creating a healthy mix of stories with a recognizable style. Is that old-fashioned? Plus ça change.

A bonus prediction from Modern Farmer’s digital director, Jake Swearingen:

Social media will continue to be a bigger and bigger chunk of how digital publishers get traffic, and Facebook will continue to dominate who gets what traffic. At our publication, and most publications I’ve worked at, Facebook delivers about five to ten times the amount of traffic as Twitter — even if most edit types (myself included) tend to spend a lot more time on Twitter.

But the territory of viral memes has been so thoroughly colonized that publishers who haven’t already figured it out are probably too late to the game. BuzzFeed and Upworthy might have figured why people share stories on Facebook — no haters, basically — but imitators abound. Even The Washington Post’s Know More seems a bit like when AOL-Netscape launched Propeller back in 2006 to chase after Digg, and then quietly killed it a few years later. (And beyond the diminishing returns of meme traffic, a world of unending Upworthy is too depressing to consider.)

So publishers will have to go for other ways to make things go viral. To crib from Annalee Newitz, there’s busting common myths or digging up an unknown truth about a common item. There’s also digging up new trends, reporting on a new bit of tech that’ll actually help the average consumer, or (luckily for us at Modern Farmer) finding ways to work pictures of very cute animals.

So assuming Facebook is truly serious about being the Only Website You Ever Visit and wants to make its News Feed a place of unendingly interesting news, how will publications respond?

One of the keys, I believe, is nailing the middleform. If Facebook is serious about designating high quality sources and publishers (even though there’s a lot of debate about what they actually mean by that), churn-and-burn aggregation artists will take a hit. And longform, while admired by journalists, is only sometimes successful. It’s putting tremendous amounts of resources in one basket, which is a risky bet at best.

Which is why sites like The New Republic, The Atlantic, the online version of The New Yorker (and, ahem, ourselves) all seem to be settling in on middleform stories. By which I mean around 750- to 1,000-word pieces that introduce a topic, explore it, and then quickly get out. It’s not a blog post with an intro, a block quote, and a snarky kicker, but it’s also not a deeply reported story with 14 sources and the manpower of a research desk behind it. Middleform is the five-minute read, not the one-minute list of GIFs or the 30-minute deep dive. It allows online publishers who (barring some seismic shift in CPMs) will always remain resource-strapped to deliver interesting, original, reported pieces without spending the tremendous amount of money and time longform requires.

Online publishing is, unfortunately, a lottery. It’s very hard, with a few exceptions, to know exactly what will hit. So the more tickets, the better your chances. For a long time, that meant whoever could push out the absolute most content, regardless of quality, got the most traffic. If Facebook holds true to what they seem to be saying, quality and originality will suddenly start to matter quite a bit more for publishers that rely on social traffic. Middleform will allow publishers to continue to push out content at a speedy clip, while hopefully capitalizing on whatever changes Facebook’s algorithms will bring us.

Five years ago, when I first started building the news organization that my colleagues and I now call Chalkbeat (then known as GothamSchools), a friend asked me an innocent question. “So you cover education now. But what will your next beat be?”

elizabeth-greenMy prediction for 2014 is that more nonprofit news entrepreneurs will answer that question the way I didn’t yet know how to do five years ago. “Nothing,” we will tell our politely inquiring friends. “We only cover [insert-your-nerdy-public-policy-specialty-here]. That’s it.”

Much has been made of charismatic star reporters becoming brands and then businesses. At Chalkbeat, our story is different. Yes, like The Dish or Deadline Hollywood or TV Newser, we have grown from a small reverse-chron blog to a full-blown news organization with employees and living wages and HR policies.

But in our case, the main currency we are trading is not personality, point of view, or even a particularly distinctive voice. The coin of our realm — the thing that took us from a couple of reporters squatting in somebody else’s basement to a soon-to-be more than $3 million-revenue news organization — is much less sexy: subject matter expertise.

We simply took one topic — in fact, one sliver of one topic: not just K-12 public schools, but K-12 public schools in low-income communities undergoing change efforts — and knew more about it than anyone else in the geographic areas where we work, ditching the political back-and-forth and scandal-driven coverage that would probably would have delivered us more pageviews in favor of context, substance, and analysis. Over time, our expertise grew into a brand. And lately, the brand has become a full-fledged business.

In 2014, my bet is that this same story will unfold with more public-policy topics. (It is already happening with health, transportation, higher education, Syria, and climate change, among other subjects, as this Tow Center report describes.) More niche nonprofit news organizations will be unmistakably good for democracy. The more knowledgeable our news sources, the more knowledgeable we can be as citizens and policymakers.

Even better, subject matter expertise also seems to have a real shot at becoming self-sustaining. Like any single subject in the commercial sector, individual public policy issues comprise their own industries. In our K-12 education universe, that means we don’t just have to rely on the tiny set of usual-suspect journalism supporters to give us grants or on local businesses to buy sponsorships. We have a defined audience that a defined set of foundations, donors, and sponsors want to reach — and so raising money, while always a challenge, is relatively easier.

I began to learn this lesson one night at a fundraising dinner, when a donor told me that monetizing our journalism was as simple as learning to play the piano. The hard part, he said, is building a loyal and targeted audience. After that, a monkey could do the rest. At the time, I restrained myself from punching him in the face. But three months later, we’d raised nearly half that year’s budget in sponsorships.

Good thing I didn’t punch him.

Sometime in the past few years, the blog died. In 2014, people will finally notice. Sure, blogs still exist, many of them are excellent, and they will go on existing and being excellent for many years to come. But the function of the blog, the nebulous informational task we all agreed the blog was fulfilling for the past decade, is increasingly being handled by a growing number of disparate media forms that are blog-like but also decidedly not blogs.

jason-kottkeInstead of blogging, people are posting to Tumblr, tweeting, pinning things to their board, posting to Reddit, Snapchatting, updating Facebook statuses, Instagramming, and publishing on Medium. In 1997, wired teens created online diaries, and in 2004 the blog was king. Today, teens are about as likely to start a blog (over Instagramming or Snapchatting) as they are to buy a music CD. Blogs are for 40-somethings with kids.

Instead of launching blogs, companies are building mobile apps, Newsstand magazines on iOS, and things like The Verge. The Verge or Gawker or Talking Points Memo or BuzzFeed or The Huffington Post are no more blogs than The New York Times or Fox News, and they are increasingly not referring to themselves as such.

The primary mode for the distribution of links has moved from the loosely connected network of blogs to tightly integrated services like Facebook and Twitter. If you look at the incoming referers to a site like BuzzFeed, you’ll see tons of traffic from Facebook, Twitter, Reddit, Stumbleupon, and Pinterest but not a whole lot from blogs, even in the aggregate. For the past month at kottke.org, 14 percent of the traffic came from referrals compared to 30 percent from social, and I don’t even work that hard on optimizing for social media. Sites like BuzzFeed and Upworthy aren’t seeking traffic from blogs anymore. Even the publicists clogging my inbox with promotional material urge me to “share this on my social media channels” rather than post it to my blog.

The design metaphor at the heart of the blog format is on the wane as well. In a piece at The Atlantic, Alexis Madrigal says that the reverse-chronological stream (a.k.a. The Stream, a.k.a. The River of News) is on its way out. Snapchat, with its ephemeral media, is an obvious non-stream app; Madrigal calls it “a passing fog.” Facebook’s News Feed is increasingly organized by importance, not chronology. Pinterest, Digg, and an increasing number of other sites use grid layouts to present information. Twitter is coming to resemble radio news as media outlets repost the same stories throughout the day, ICYMI (in case you missed it). Reddit orders stories by score. The design of BuzzFeed’s front page barely matters because most of their traffic comes in from elsewhere.

So, R.I.P. The Blog, 1997-2013. But this isn’t cause for lament. The Stream might be on the wane but still it dominates. All media on the web and in mobile apps has blog DNA in it and will continue to for a long while. Over the past 16 years, the blog format has evolved, had social grafted onto it, and mutated into Facebook, Twitter, and Pinterest and those new species have now taken over. No biggie, that’s how technology and culture work. If you want something to cry about, cry about the decline of the open web, the death of which would be a huge blow for us all. But perhaps that’s a topic better left for 2015.

Happy trails, old friend. It’s been grand.

In 2014, the future of journalism is Beyoncé.

Stay with me for a minute.

The pop star announced the arrival of her next, highly anticipated album with a video on Instagram at midnight on a school night. A few short days later, it was certified a number one hit by Billboard and sales soared past the one million mark.

jenna-worthamNo one saw it coming. No one leaked rumors or songs in advance. And people can’t stop talking about it.

Beyoncé completely upended the conventional model by which major album releases are done by the sheer amount of material that she airdropped simultaneously — more than a dozen new songs and videos.

Her strategy, and its success, could shine a light on what consumers want and what is possible for all content creators, entertainers and publishers alike, in the future. It’s important to note that Bey’s strategy isn’t popular in a commercial sense — brick-and-mortar retailers like Target have promised not to sell her album because it was available digitally before it was made available physically, which feels like an egregious error on their part, given the overall popularity of the album — but it earns points with me for not being afraid to upset the incumbents, to experiment with something new.

Her monumental success with the release may also be an indicator that the direct-to-consumers model, the same one that startups like streaming services VHX and ebooks startups like Emily Books are using, can create increasingly viable and sustainable businesses. Beyoncé’s album is currently only available through iTunes: People had to pay for the content and download it in order to listen to it. And many, including myself, didn’t hesitate to buy it, and those of us who did are not disappointed. The digital-first release didn’t compromise the quality or the originality of the album — it’s one of her best releases to date. The demand is there if the experience is new enough and original enough.

Of course, Beyoncé has millions of followers around the globe. She has a built-in audience for anything she releases. But given the glut of content vying for people’s attention each day, especially in music, it’s interesting to observe the delight and excitement around such an immersive and fresh experience. Her fans weren’t barraged by a series of advertisement and reminders about her coming album for months. They were thrilled by the surprise and can’t get enough of it.

Beyonce’s massive drop completely wiped out anything else in the music and entertainment industry for the rest of the year and probably for part of the new year. It will also likely set off a new trend for artists to think about how they release music and whether or not they have to adhere to the traditional model of distribution.

There’s no doubt that data-driven newsrooms are in vogue. Editors are increasingly glued to Chartbeat; social savant Neetzan Zimmerman is enjoying Nate Silveresque fame; and a Cold War-esque battle for supremacy in terms of total “uniques” rages on.

james-robinsonBut this obsession with scale obscures the real opportunity for news organizations: using analytics to better understand their core audiences, no matter how large or small, and to develop meaningful relationships with them. In other words, 2014 is the year that newsrooms will begin to think of analytics as a way to increase the quality of their readership, not just the quantity.

This shift in focus is starting to happen at subscription properties, where user-level insights from the business side have inspired editors to think about how concepts like audience segmentation, multivariate testing, and propensity modeling can be applied in the service of their journalistic mission.

But for all types of newsrooms, developing a more qualitative understanding of audiences will be increasingly important. As publishers continue to invest in longform journalism and experiment with new types of storytelling, questions will naturally arise about the ways in which people actually read and engage with these pieces, beyond the feel-good tally of how many visitors they attract. (Likewise, the true value of social media may not be best quantified by a simple accounting of referral traffic.) And editors are beginning to realize that these relationships are a two-way street — not just for publishing out, but as an important tool for sourcing stories as well.

Even though an analyst’s technical toolkit has advanced significantly in recent years, useful audience insights still do not come prepackaged in a shrink-wrapped box. It’s easy to blame veteran editors for not “getting” advanced quantitative techniques or concepts — actually, few people do — but even the smartest data scientists often lack an intuitive understanding of what makes newsrooms tick. If analysts can start thinking like journalists — and vice versa — the rewards will be incalculable.

Earlier this year, Daniel Victor published a righteous takedown of Twitter hashtags, pointing to the use of #SuperBowl as a case study in the worst excesses of the form. On Super Bowl Sunday, by his count, #SuperBowl showed up 3 million times during the five-hour broadcast, at an average rate of 167 tweets per second. “Hashtags for big news stories are particularly vulnerable to mathematical futility,” he wrote. “Getting any single person’s attention is just short of impossible, like a single Niagara droplet screaming for notice as it shoots down the falls.”

tasneem-rajaPoint taken. During Occupy, for instance, reading my news feed felt like hacking through a jungle of #ows #occupy #occupyny #nypd, as news outlets tried reaching too many audiences at once. Of course, there are plenty of good ways to use a hashtag: as a knowing wink or a signal of sarcasm, a way of finding friends at a conference, or, one of my favorite uses, an ephemeral vehicle of crowdsourced wordplay, like #bookdrinks (Tequila Mockingbird, Gone With the Wine). But a quick scan of recent tweets from @nytimes, @slate, and @buzzfeed doesn’t reveal a single earnest or seemingly traffic-seeking hashtag. Outpaced by better Twitter search features and downvoted by those with good taste, the utilitarian, crowd-gathering hashtag has come to feel useless and passe.

But lately, I’ve been noticing an interesting trend of hashtag usage that’s got me thinking about the possibilities of the form again. This weekend, for instance, you may have noticed #NotYourAsianSidekick bubbling up in your feed (especially if you follow a sizeable number of people who aren’t straight white men). It was the top trend in the U.S. for much of Sunday, started by writer and activist Suey Park to crowdsource messages about stereotyping and the Asian-American experience. Sample tweets from the nearly 50,000 messages with the tag in just over 24 hours: “The clothes I wear to weddings aren’t for you to wear on Halloween #NotYourAsianSidekick” and “#NotYourAsianSidekick because I don’t co-sign the anti-blackness implied when we’re propped up as the ‘model minority.'” Anyone who’s ever dismissed the possibility of serious discussion on Twitter would have to admit: That’s some real talk. Salon said the tag “ignite[d] massive conversation about race, stereotypes and feminism,” and Park’s “campaign” was covered by the BBC, The Washington Post, The Guardian, and Al Jazeera, among many others.

Digital feminism has been busy on the viral hashtag front this year. #SolidarityIsForWhiteWomen called out thorny issues of race and class in feminist media, with Gawker site Jezebel drawing much of the heat. BuzzFeed included Mikki Kendall, who started the tag, in its roundup of “30 Women Who Kicked Ass In 2013,” for “bringing race into the online feminist conversation.” (Meanwhile, several sites got dinged on Twitter for initially failing to credit Kendall as the originator of the meme, bringing up interesting issues of attribution and sourcing when covering these fast-moving, viral conversations.)

But what’s the offline payoff of all this online conversation? Can campaigns like Park’s move the needle IRL, or is this another case of “clicktivism” masquerading as political action? As David Carr noted in a rumination on “hashtag activism,” #Komen helped push the Susan G. Komen Foundation into reversing a decision to stop funding Planned Parenthood. And #bindersfullofwomen certainly didn’t help Mitt Romney’s attempts to win over women voters, and probably helped drive more of the crucial demographic to Obama.

Then there’s #blacktwitter. If you haven’t heard of #blacktwitter, you’re missing out on one of the best parts of Twitter. Shani O. Hilton at Buzzfeed describes it as “loosely speaking, a group of thousands of black Twitterers (though, to be accurate, not everyone within Black Twitter is black, and not every black person on Twitter is in Black Twitter) who are interested in issues of race in the news and pop culture and b) tweet A LOT.” Much more than a hashtag at this point, Hilton notes that Black Twitter has been widely credited with bringing the Trayvon Martin case to national attention, the success of Scandal, and the toppling of Paula Deen over racist remarks. More recently, Black Twitter hijacked the #AskRKelly hashtag hosted by the singer and alleged child molester, turning a PR gimmick into a searing conversation on Kelly’s stardom and the treatment of young black women in the broader culture.

“Sure, hashtags come and go,” writes Carr, “and the so-called weak ties of digital movements are no match for real world engagement. But they are not only better than nothing, they probably make the world, the one beyond the keyboard, a better place.”

So what are newsrooms supposed to make of all this? In the case of #NotYourAsianSidekick and several of the Black Twitter memes, the hashtag wasn’t used to keep up with an event. The hashtag was the event. So far, most mainstream sites covering these hashtag happenings end up simply embedding a curated list of the tweets in the form of a roundup (or a Storify), with a bit of intro up top that often feels perfunctory. Keeping a record of these events is well and good, but it seems to me there’s a lot more to be mined here.

If you really want to be #winning, think of these tags as hunting grounds for future hires and (paid) contributors. The levels of wit, critical thinking, domain knowledge, netspeak literacy, digital acumen — and, of course, diversity — on display in these conversations should have editors sitting up and taking note. As #solidarityisforwhitewomen was surging, Roxane Gay started a new column at Salon soliciting paid submissions from feminists of color (of any gender) to run on the site. “The #solidarityisforwhitewomen conversation about digital feminism and inclusion has made it clear that more publications need to create opportunities for feminists of color to share their perspectives,” she wrote.

That’s a great move, and smaller steps are also good. Journalists, especially journalists who write about cultural politics and marginalized groups, have both a professional incentive and an ethical obligation to seek out authentic, fresh, informed sources on issues they’re trying to write about. Think of hashtags like #NotYourAsianSidekick as the best Rolodex you could ever have for sources on these issues. Don’t think of the conversations they spawn as just free content ripe for cutting-and-pasting into a blog post and call it a day. They’re springboards for reporting, at the very least.

You could research the often decades-long backstories to these conversations, for instance, and write a piece that adds historical context to the trending topic. And I’ve seen plenty of unsourced stats and claims that surface during these conversations — from all sides of the debate — get passed around like Twitter hotcakes: Fact-check that mess.

Thankfully, the days of broad, generic callouts — #china, #politics, #food — from serious media sites seem to be behind us. But the use of micro-targeted hashtags that land with big impact is fascinating, and we’re going to see a lot more of these in 2014. #bringiton

Citizen journalism is not a new concept. In the digital age, prior to the advent of Twitter, bloggers were the flag bearers of the movement. While innovative (citizen coverage of the 2004 tsunami is widely cited as an early watershed moment for the movement), pre-social media blogging lacked distribution and organizational power. The rise of social platforms changed that, spurring a greater democratization of media. The examples are by now well known, from the “Miracle on the Hudson” to the Egyptian revolution. With the ubiquity of Twitter and more so Facebook, every citizen is not just a potential source but also a potential reporter.

justin-auciellloAnd it’s no longer just the major stories, like political unrest, a plane crash, or a natural disaster. Covering the realities of everyday life — car accidents, house fires, general police activity, weather emergencies — is well suited to the citizen journalist, many of whom are now armed with mobile devices and reporting in real time. It’s Facebook, not Twitter, that’s leading the charge, which is not surprising considering that as of October, Facebook claims 1.15 billion monthly active users compared to Twitter’s 220 million.

As a journalist that started reporting as a citizen (“on the scene,” curation, and aggregation), I created Jersey Shore Hurricane News (JSHN), a two-way news outlet based exclusively (for now) on Facebook and Twitter in the days before Hurricane Irene August 2011 in order to provide citizens with a “news for the people, by the people” platform that is strict on journalistic integrity.

While the objective is to supply news, traffic, and weather information to the community, it’s also a community platform, allowing people to interact, collaborate, and discuss local issues. It provided wall-to-wall coverage before, during, and after Superstorm Sandy and to this day assists with the storm recovery. The citizens, dubbed on JSHN as “contributors,” are both the sources and reporters, and with over 220,000 of them between Facebook and Twitter, the ability to disseminate information quickly is powerful.

What makes JSHN — as well as other notable citizen news outlets like Monmouth County Police, Fire, and EMS and Anne Arundel County Breaking News and Events — unique is that they’re run by regular citizens, not traditional news organizations. Accordingly, the ethos is inherently bottom-up, which proves to be a major disruptive force.

My predictions for 2014:

Citizen reporters will have more robust tools at their disposal. Social media (particularly Facebook) will continue to play a vital role in citizen journalism efforts, but with smartphone numbers continually growing, we will see an influx of feature-rich citizen news apps developed by regular citizens who are simply interested in keeping their communities informed. These apps will allow citizens to share news with each other in real-time in an organized multimedia environment, combining text, photo, and video reports. Editors will monitor the apps to ensure journalistic standards are met and will build stories as they evolve, potentially taking a page out of Circa’s playbook.
More collaboration between citizen journalism platforms and traditional media. It’s nothing new for mainstream media to rely on citizen reports posted on social media sites, but we will see increased in-depth collaboration with established citizen news organizations. This will benefit both sides, allowing for a rapid pipeline of information and increased credibility for the citizen news organization. WHYY/NewsWorks, the public radio outlet in Philadelphia, recognized the mutual benefit, forming a content-sharing partnership with Jersey Shore Hurricane News. Organizations like the New Jersey News Commons, formed to strengthen ties between news outlets in New Jersey, will continue to assist and promote citizen journalism efforts.
Progressive-minded foundations will support citizen journalism efforts. They’ll recognize that these outlets were originally created not with building an enterprise in mind, but simply to keep people informed. But with the movement still young, it will require support to stimulate growth. The Dodge Foundation’s New Jersey Recovery Fund, created to support catalytic ideas and projects with an emphasis on collaboration, innovation, and sustainability as New Jersey recovers from Hurricane Sandy, granted money to Jersey Shore Hurricane News to develop platforms outside of social media. More foundations will fund the effort in the coming year.
With communities already relying on established citizen news platforms, advertisers will take notice. With traditional media, including national hyperlocal efforts like Patch, cutting back, advertisers will flock to citizen platforms. This will happen for two overarching reasons: growth and community support. Established citizen platforms already have active participants who live in the communities in which they report. The nascent nature of these outlets is fertile ground for advertisers to grow and strengthen bonds with the community.
Twitter and especially Facebook will nurture and assist the platforms. As more citizens band together to report news and community oriented information, their power will increase, and the social media sites will create tools to facilitate the growth.
Citizen journalism may not be a new concept, but it’s still in its infancy, and 2014 will be the year when we’ll witness the more powerful citizen reporter.

I’m excited to see what 2014 brings for the many media startups that have launched over the past few years and hope to both fill the void left behind by struggling legacy institutions and tap digital tools to create more informed and engaged communities.

csmithI’ve spent the past year and a half or so immersed in learning about entrepreneurship from a variety of different people and perspectives. The excellent Scripps Howard Journalism Entrepreneurship Institute, led by Dan Gillmor, offered journalism professors expert help in introducing entrepreneurial concepts into our teaching; Memphis Innovation Bootcamp was an intensive three-day introduction into design thinking; our local accelerator Start.co introduced me to the business model canvas and other startup principles with their ongoing programming, and PBS MediaShift’s Collab/Space Atlanta offered the chance to get a close look at the challenges and successes of a group of fledgling media-related startups. Suffice it to say: Startups have been top of mind.

If there is one thing I’ve learned from all of this, it is that the most important thing startups need to succeed is a relentless focus on their customers’ problems and the ability to constantly iterate. The news startups that do this are the ones we will see succeed in 2014 and beyond.

This applies to nonprofits as well — at least the ones hoping to sustain themselves for the long haul. As more than one startup expert has told me: “Nonprofit isn’t a business model. It’s a tax status.”

While I don’t think there’s any doubt that communities need information and tools to engage with each other in order to thrive and to self-govern, I think some media startups are a bit vague when it comes to articulating precisely what their readers’ needs are and how they will meet them. Journalists have long talked about serving “the public” even as, unconsciously or not, they have succumbed to writing for their peers and Pulitzer judges. Doing that in the startup environment is risky and may lead to failure or at least lackluster results.

Spending so much time with entrepreneurs has taught me to be suspicious of business plans or pitches that don’t start with an intensive period of observation and discussion of how customers experience problems and what kinds of solutions would best meet their needs, followed by developing an ongoing process of testing new product features with users.

One example of a journalism-related startup that I think shows promise in its focus on a concrete problem to-be-solved is Clear Health Costs, and I look forward to seeing what they achieve in 2014. This startup uses journalistic skills to bring transparency to the notoriously opaque medical industry and meets a demonstrable need for more information about the costs of health care procedures and drugs. Particularly for people with minimal health insurance and high deductibles, this information is an obvious, pressing need.

Another example of a promising media startup I hope to see do good things in 2014 is Groundsource, which uses a simple system to ask people questions via text message. It works even on basic feature phones, and thus can be used throughout the globe. Not only is this of obvious use to journalists seeking to broaden their source base and do better reporting, it’s also easy to imagine how pollsters and other experts in public opinion or market research could also use the tool, perhaps subsidizing its journalistic and pro-social aims.

I’m also encouraged by the substantial number of new and established hyperlocal news startups, many of them nonprofits. I think many show great potential for 2014, but the most likely to succeed will be those that are closest to their communities and that have an intimate understanding of their readers’ information-seeking behaviors and motivations.

My prediction isn’t particularly snazzy. It doesn’t require drones or sensors or wearables. It gets back to common sense, highlighting our role as an industry in creating informed citizens. 2014 will be the year of contextualization.

lauren-rabainoNews organizations have so far been bad at contextualizing information. We publish articles on a 24-hour news cycle and expect readers to figure out how to connect the dots on their own. We use one sentence near the top of a story to rehash concepts we may have covered at length in previous articles. Rarely do readers follow a story from the beginning — but when they jump in at the middle, we don’t help guide them through what they’ve missed. And we essentially write new content that we then throw away at the end of the day. Content shouldn’t die by design.

For those news organizations lucky enough to have CMSes that let them tag and categorize content robustly, they might be able to make automatic topic pages. Or if their editors are savvy, little nuggets will be hyperlinked to previous coverage. But even these mechanisms — when used at all — still rely on the user to read through every link to figure out what the story is and which pieces of it are important.

We’re finally — just barely — starting to get the hang of publishing content online, optimizing it, integrating multimedia, using data to find and tell stories, making it work on mobile. This doesn’t inhibit all that. As we contextualize, we’ll improve all that.

What does contextualization mean?
The sixteen-letter word is a vague one that can have many interpretations. In this case, I’m specifically talking about topical contexualization. This means guiding readers through large, convoluted news topics: the topics we send our reporters to cover, to obsess over, to write about every new development. The topics for which we are authorities.

For niche brands, this might mean something like technology or fashion. For local newspapers, it might mean local government or community issues. No matter the topic, we are going to see a shift in how we help people understand where information fits and what it means. I’m talking about getting away from the article as the entry point and ending point for understanding news.

The episodic story is dead changing.
Events don’t happen on 24-hour news cycles, and the most important of those events can’t be captured in 2,000-word stories. But that’s how we publish, because that’s how newspapers and daily broadcasts are designed. Topics that impact our lives have winding histories, key players over time, topical shifts that are important to understanding the whole story. They don’t really start over every day with a new angle, as we’d force readers to believe. We’re limiting the opportunity for our readers to understand all the intersecting impacts by reducing that important context into a few paragraphs of background on each new development we write about.

The argument against the episodic story is by no means a new one. Jay Rosen wrote about the topic five years ago and held a South By Southwest panel on it. Matt Thompson wrote at Nieman Lab in 2009 about adding context and depth to how we report news. Sean Blanda did a talk about it last year. There have been many others.

But this is the year we’re actually going to do something about it.

Want informal proof? More than half of the teams at the Global Editors Network hackathon at Yahoo! in November dealt with context, from topic explorers to breaking news timelines to topical activity streams. This is the year we’re going to do it because our readers and editors demand it of us.

An investment newsrooms will have to make in helping redefine contextual storytelling is going to be the innovation hubs in our newsrooms. Yes, I’m talking about the news apps teams or data teams or any other developer teams who are able to quickly iterate and push ideas to market, all while empowering culture changes along the way. I shouldn’t have to say this in 2013, but because I know newsrooms, I know I still must plead with newsroom leaders to demand more developers.

Examples of places that are thinking about this
So what does this look like when it’s all said and done? It’s up to us, and it’ll hopefully be ever evolving. Some news organizations have already started, but no one has gotten it quite right.

ProPublica’s topic pages get us closer to contextualizing huge topics. For every major series that they cover over time, there’s a landing page that lays out:

The story so far
Featured stories in the series
A list of all stories in the series, reverse chronological
Filterable by major-stories-only if you don’t care about the in-betweens
Vox’s StoryStreams are similar, but not used as often for hard-hitting, longterm stories as much as they are for in-the-moment events or sports games. Continual updates around one event are captured in a “stream” that includes a link to posts that make up the stream. The problem with Vox’s streams is that once you’ve entered any point within it, you’ve lost the connection back to the context, and where that point sits on the timeline.

The Washington Post’s 9 things about Syria story made the rounds a while back and was applauded for bringing a human approach to a complex topic. Though this is hardly a technical solution to the problem, it’s the right attitude and direction.

Taking it to the next step
Topic pages aren’t enough. Topic pages with filters aren’t enough. Wikis aren’t enough. We’re going to dramatically re-think how we publish content, and it won’t happen without culture changes, open minds and a little experimentation. This year, we’ll:

Stop thinking of content as unstructured text with headlines, bylines, ledes, nut grafs, etc. There will be an emphasis of the pieces of information that make up those stories.
Create more living content that gets updated at a canonical source as a topic evolves.
Start thinking more holistically about stories and writing content in non-narrative formats.
Come up with better mechanisms to organize the information that makes up articles.
Integrate more structured data into everything we do, blurring the lines between “news apps” and “stories.”
We probably aren’t ready to kill the narrative or the episodic story just yet. Maybe that’ll be a prediction in 2018. But we’re going to start.

Imagine opening NPR’s app on your phone to read a story before heading to work. You glance at the clock and realize you’re running late, so you grab your keys and rush out the door. As you start walking, the app starts playing the audio story of the same piece you were reading — no tapping required.

katie-zhuNext year is going to bring Google Now to news: the right information through the right medium at the right time.

In 2014, newsrooms are going to reframe our understanding of “responsive design.” We’re going to see content move beyond simply responding to screen size and instead respond to reader context, adapting to behavior.

We’ve done an excellent job of optimizing text for mobile over the past few years. Responsive is the de facto standard for news consumption on the go — but what’s truly responsive? Shouldn’t it respond to whether I’m walking or sitting, reading during the morning or at night — maybe if I’m stressed or not?

Newsrooms are going to start thinking about responsive in terms of tailoring experiences based on a reader’s context in the physical world  —  we can no longer assume that just because a reader is using their phone that they’re on the go. We’ve seen the rise of second screen apps in journalism this year. And you know as well as I that sometimes it’s just too much effort to reach for your laptop when your phone is sitting right next to you on the couch.

We now have the technical means to gather data about how people are using their various devices. In 2014, news organizations will be doing more to leverage this data to inform how they serve content — in fact, we’ve already seen hints of this in 2013, just in a less automated way. The New York Times launched New York Today, which targets readers on their morning commute, giving them local news about weather, politics, business in a bursty editorial package.

The bottom line is this: We’ve always listened to our readers. But readers don’t necessarily know what they want. Using a phone’s gyroscope and accelerometer, we can gather realtime data about how people are using their device at a given point in time — we know if they are walking or lying down, we know the weather and their location — and use all this knowledge to decide when to serve what content to readers and through what medium.

Here’s the tablet news app I’m hoping for in 2014: something that detects when I’m lying down in bed (it knows my device orientation and, using the ambient light sensor, can detect it’s dark) and serves me the sort of video content that I never have time to watch during the day.

Newsrooms have the ability to understand something more about their users when they use their product on a phone. And I have no doubt that the brilliant minds in journalism will use this gained knowledge to provide better experiences in 2014. I’ll be waiting.

This is more a wish list than a set of predictions: business developments I’d like to see in legacy media in 2014 (but I’m not holding my breath).

rick-edmonds-2
Ditch uniques and develop a better metric. Then-Newspaper Association of America president Mark Contreras was right when he made this case four years ago. It still hasn’t happened. One- or two-time visitors are not a business opportunity — they are an accident.
Make mobile revenues more than a rounding error. The audience has arrived; accompanying advertising has not. Maybe the big boys like Google, Facebook, and Twitter cannot be caught. But the clock is ticking on building some sort of revenue template.
Exploit journalism capacity as a strategic advantage. Sure, lots of news is commodified. And hats off to BuzzFeed, Upworthy, et al. for inventing a shareable content model for the massive social media market. But newspapers and local television stations will do better not to ape what’s hot — but to play instead from the strength of generating acts of journalism large and small relevant to their local communities.
For newspapers, get the lines to cross. Subscription revenue, digital marketing and advertising and “other” revenue need to exceed continuing ad revenue losses. Otherwise the industry will still be heading backward – and it may well be in 2014 and 2015.

My predictions:

evan-smithAnother big-brand magazine (or three) will reduce its frequency in print.

Another big-brand editor will ditch ink-on-paper for pixels-on-screen.

And another big-brand foundation not named Knight will make a seismic investment in non-profit online news.

Bonus: The hand-wringing about native advertising will give way to hand-clapping at the prospect of someone paying for serious journalism. Yes, disclosure and transparency are the entire ballgame, but haven’t they always been? There should be rules and regs and standards messaged from on high, and bad actors should be publicly stoned. Beyond that, the self-appointed integrity cops — you know who you are — need to take a chill pill.

For commercial news media in the Western world, the underlying thrust in 2014 remains the same that it was 2013 and has been for a decade or more. It is a move towards a world in which we will have more media — including stakeholder media serving various special interests — but fewer resources for professionally produced, general-interest news journalism. None of the business models currently in place nor those being tried out generate the revenues common in the 1990s. In this environment, survival is success both for established legacy news media and for new entrants.

rasmus_kleis_nielsenThree things to watch as news media organizations old and new struggle to navigate this environment:

Will the full gale of creative digital destruction finally hit television? Is this going to be the year linear, programmed television on broadcast, satellite, and cable — after years of people crying wolf — begins to experience disruption on a scale comparable to what print publishing and the music business have already experienced? So far, evidence for cord-cutting is mixed and limited, and television continues to dominate most people’s media use.
But broadband access and bandwidth is increasing, TV advertising is showing signs of weakness in the U.S. as audiences fragment further and move to other platforms, and in the U.K., streaming and various forms of catch-up services, often accessed via “second screens,” are increasing rapidly. There is also concern that many broadcasters so far have been missing out on the move to mobile platforms and that they, like newspaper publishers before them, may be losing touch with younger generations. Television broadcasters never invested as much in news reporting as newspapers did, but they did invest in news, and they do disseminate news to very large audiences. Both the investment and the dissemination will change if television is disrupted on a large scale.

What is happening with relations between content producers and social media? Publishers have long seen sites like Facebook and Twitter as frenemies. Publishers have complained that social media sites benefit disproportionally from their content, but have shied away from preventing people from sharing it freely, as they also want the audience social media can drive to news websites (a third or more of overall traffic in some cases).
As established social media sites continue to adapt to serve their users and fend off new competitors, they have also begun to more explicitly recognize the real value of professionally produced quality content for their business. Just as Google in 2011 tweaked its algorithms to keep content farms and low-grade, search-engine-optimized fluff out of the top search results, Facebook in December 2013 announced changes to increase the amount of links to “high quality content” that appear in users’ feed (mentioning. among other things. news about current events from trusted sources). Twitter has talked very openly about the “special” relation it has to television and the centrality of the social media-legacy media relationship to its business model and future development. These developments may help publishers who have been struggling to make money online to sustain their investment in journalism.

How will pay models for digital news evolve? I don’t see any way in which the spread of digital pay models across much of the newspaper industry in North America and Western Europe points towards a near future in which these companies will make anything like the kind of money many of them made in the 1990s. But I’m cautiously optimistic that those organizations who produce genuinely distinct quality content, continue to serve their audiences, and are willing to invest in developing their digital products can reach a point where pay is one amongst several meaningful sources of revenue.
Putting aside the often discussed highly non-representative examples of The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and the Financial Times, take three other cases: Axel Springer in Germany has just announced it has won almost 150,000 paying digital subscribers for its popular tabloid Bild after introducing a freemium model six months ago. The company reports 47,000 digital subscribers for its upmarket broadsheet Die Welt, which introduced a metered model about a year ago. The Helsingin Sanomat in Finland has introduced a metered paywall, sold digital subscriptions at an additional cost to close to half of its existing print subscribers (more than 130,000), and seen online advertising increase at the same time. News Corp, long ridiculed for the “hard” paywall around the London Times, now reports more than 100,000 digital subscribers for the upmarket Times and its sister paper the Sunday Times (both of which have been charging since 2010) and the same for the popular tabloid the Sun (which introduced its premium Sun+ four months ago).

With the possible exception of the Helsingin Sanomat (130,000 paying digital subscribers in a country of less than 6 million!), none of these numbers are eye-popping success stories, and in most cases they pale by comparison to each title’s print readership, diminished as it is. But all of these figures are a heck of a lot better than nothing, and they may point towards a future where there is still some commercial basis for producing news.

It may be boring and slightly depressing to focus on these kinds of issues that continue to challenge the business of journalism, but when it comes to the future of news, as when it comes to so many other things, it is worth following the money.

Social will get smarter
sarah-marshall
New newsgathering tools for social media will be developed. There may be new alert systems for breaking stories, improved contact suggestions, and better recommendations for Twitter lists. Some of these features will be launched by Twitter, Facebook, and other platforms, but many will come from third-party platforms.
Visual content will continue to do well on social. News organizations will invest increasing amounts of time and creativity in posting videos, images, and interactives directly to social platforms.
News sites will find new ways to use social media to surface stories from the archives and extend the lifecycle of content.
News organizations will learn from social media and offer readers more personalized alerts. They will find ways to creatively curate content and tailor it to reader preferences.
News sites will continue to experiment with microvideo, telling stories in 15 seconds on Instagram and six seconds on Vine.
Mobile will get smarter
News organizations will find new ways of turning news and information into a utility for mobile.
Mobile geolocation information will be better used to push out relevant news stories to readers and to aid journalists in newsgathering.
More than half of social traffic to news sites will be mobile in 2014. According to a study by analytics platform Chartbeat, a quarter of traffic to news sites was on mobile in October 2013, but for many sites more than 40 percent of social traffic was mobile. The tipping point will be 2014, when more than 50 percent of social traffic will be mobile.

A favorite editor of mine used to say that you can tell a news organization’s values by what it chooses not to cover.

I always liked that, especially as it applies to news judgment in a content-choked digital world. We have access to oceans of information online. For any news organization to produce meaningful journalism, it must figure out how to elevate its work above the rest of the riffraff retweeting the same things, broadcasting the same livestreams, and quoting the same press releases.

LaFranceMug_250This sort of differentiation has everything to do with clearly defined values. Not the Journalism 101 stuff like your newsroom’s commitment to accuracy and fairness — the trickier existential question of what makes your newsroom yours and how your reporters demonstrate your organization’s values through their work. I think a lot of newsrooms assume they have an answer to these questions when they actually don’t. (A good place to start if you’re not sure which camp you’re in: “What does my newsroom do better than any other newsroom?”)

In 2014, I believe we’ll see more news organizations experiment with fluid beat structures. Reporters will organize their coverage around sets of evolving ideas rather than fixed places or topics. (Quartz is the go-to example of a site that’s rethinking traditional beats along these lines. More on that in a minute.) Fluid beats will help organizations reach niche and sometimes overlapping audiences that aren’t necessarily linked by the kinds of geographic or demographic ties that once defined a pre-Internet daily’s audience. Social distribution will continue to play a major role for newsrooms cultivating and interacting with these new and engaged audiences.

Now that we all have publishing power, the mechanisms by which we share information are increasingly dictated by networked structures rather than institutional ones. And now that publishing has changed, production — including beat reporting — shouldn’t just mirror institutional structures of the past either.

Designing beats around abstract ideas is a departure for beat reporters who are accustomed to focusing on specialized topics or specific regions. C.W. Anderson explained in a piece for the Lab a year ago that journalism’s old-school beat structure amounts to “institutional homophily,” which is “just a fancy way of saying that organizations charged with interacting with large bureaucracies often become bureaucracies themselves, because it makes the interaction easier.”

Covering a bureaucracy by turning into one? Zzzzz. No wonder so many people skip all those very serious and very important public affairs stories city hall reporters write. But part of why some of those kinds of stories can seem boring today is because they’re framed in ways that made sense for newspapers 20 years ago but have become antiquated today. I’m not advocating for doing away with shoe-leather city hall reporters. I was one; I loved that beat. But I also think news organizations hoping to captivate curious and globally-minded readers need to restructure beats to reflect all of the boundaries — geographic, temporal, spatial — that have evaporated in the past 20 years of journalism.

Creating a fluid beat structure doesn’t mean you’re ignoring influential bureaucracies. It just means you’re rethinking the flow of information in a way that reflects new behaviors. Today we navigate linked networks of continuous news and information rather than diving into and out of closed systems.

Ideas and the battle for what’s real
So how do we create beats that reflect this new reality? Ideas-based beats are a way for reporters to be human-centric rather than newsroom- or bureaucracy-centric.

Here’s how Anderson, Emily Bell, and Clay Shirky put it in their 2012 paper about post-industrial journalism: “What a journalist did in the industrial age was defined by the product: a headline writer, a reporter, a desk editor, a columnist, an editor. As deadlines melt, and we are in an age where the story as the ‘atomic value of news’ is in question, what journalists do all day is more defined by the requirements of the unfolding events and the audiences consuming them.” We look for credible sources who can tell us not just what happened but what’s real, an idea that calls to mind something MIT’s Judith Donath said to me in a conversation a while back: “One of the things we see a lot now is sort of like constant war between authenticity and co-opting the appearance of authenticity…We live in a world that operates in information. You’re not out foraging for berries. You’re foraging for what is actually real, what’s authentic.”

So when readers follow individual journalists from one brand to the next — the Nate Silvers and Glenn Greenwalds of the world, for instance — it’s often because those individuals produce compelling work backed by clear value systems. This doesn’t necessarily mean strong opinions, but it must at least entail basic ideas that frame the journalist’s work. This kind of framing is essential in a more fluid and abstract beat structure.

In other words, a reporter ought to have an explicitly defined driving principle for each iteration of her beat — a premise to clarify the decision to cover any given story in the first place and help determine whom to interview and what questions to ask. Every beat reporter should be able to easily answer the question: “Why is this the idea at the center of your reporting?” Or, in Quartz’s parlance: “Why are you obsessed with this?”

At Quartz, reporters have “obsessions” that change over time rather than fixed beats. The site’s global news editor, Gideon Lichfield, characterized the approach succinctly in a blog post last year: “Beats provide an institutional structure. Obsessions are a more human one.” Quartz’s approach to obsessions hasn’t resulted in coverage that amounts to a new or different kind of journalism, but the strategy clearly influences how Quartz works. Its morning newsletter is the perfect example of how Quartz prioritizes being human over being institutional — Quartz tells you what news you missed while you were sleeping, and what you should look for in the day to come. The more bureaucratic Washington Post, for example, has an email that spits out headlines organized by sections of the paper.

So what might a fluid beat structure actually look like in practice?

Let’s say my beat is “transparency.” That’s pretty abstract and unwieldy by itself. So to make sense of it, my premise — this driving principle, this value system that informs all of my journalistic work about transparency — might be something like: The public has a right to scrutinize influential gatekeepers who handle public money, personal data, and access to pivotal information. My job would be to track how that premise holds up in the real world, the extent to which there are exceptions, where and why it gets murky, and so on.

Would I naturally gravitate toward the same topics and places in my coverage the way old-school beat reporters do? Sure. I’d probably still cover some of the same kinds of stories you might find in politics or business sections. But I would organize my reporting around a compelling idea rather than trying to extract compelling ideas from distinct places or things.

This new structure better lends itself to high-impact reporting. A reporter who covers “transparency” instead of just “media” or just “campaign finance,” for example, is poised to find connections and patterns that exist in the world but otherwise aren’t typically reported — or even identified. That reporter is then well positioned to be a trusted guide on any number of stories related to transparency issues.

Considering Greenwald’s role in the new news organization Pierre Omidyar is founding, it makes sense that Omidyar also tapped NYU media thinker Jay Rosen for the $250-million-backed venture. Rosen has long advocated that journalists be upfront about some of their perspectives and values. He has also written in detail about how we might reinvent beats for the networked world. The two ideas go hand-in-hand and in many ways reflect how Greenwald already operates as a journalist. I expect this new company to shake up conventions about how beats are designed and in turn how newsrooms are organized — beyond what Quartz has done — when it launches in 2014.

Once you get used to the idea of dreaming up abstract beats, it’s hard to stop. Imagine a news organization where reporters have beats like longevity, the changing oceans, preservation, the future, representation, global borders, worst-case scenarios, authenticity, etc., etc., etc. I asked my friend Mimi Schiffman, a videographer at CNN.com, what beat she’d choose along these line and she had an answer right away: “invisible fences,” an exploration of the boundaries in life that separate us and make life harder or easier for different groups of people.

Just imagine having a beat not tethered to a physical place or set topic, but an abstract and ever-changing linked set of ideas that you get to explore in real-time with other curious people.

The options are endless. And that’s kind of the point.

As software eats the world, it consumes value chains and makes markets more efficient. It also leaves behind data, an artifact that speeds up the consumption by more software. 2014 will be the year that forces of data reshape journalism.

hassan-hodgesBill Schmarzo wrote about big data maturity as a five-step process where data is first used for basic monitoring, then enables deeper insights into performance. From there, connecting loops between data and automated action enable optimized businesses. The optimization loop that removes humans is what the world is inching ever closer to. From self-driving cars to Facebook feeds to automated trading, software is making decisions based on the data created by other software. News is part of these loops, providing both the ingredients for other people’s loops, and for our own products.

The first place data starts to matter is with internal decision making. Data lets us see what content is working and what content is not. The more data gets injected into business processes, the faster the system moves, creating a desire for more data. Once an organization gets data, it never goes back.

The power of data comes from the connections it makes to other data. The CAR space has been a side project in many newsrooms, and is increasingly moving into automated Twitter bots and alerts. Data connections are key here, and the more data connections that feed into the all-consuming software, the more these outputs matter. The more these things matter, the more they move into a central focus of an organization.

These connections are also showing up on the advertiser side. The rise of iPad-based point-of-sale systems is a bigger deal than simply swiping the same card on a different box. Many of these systems are platforms for more software — software that creates and consumes data about your transactions and behaviors. That data changes the way customers who advertise with media companies operate, and also create opportunities and/or threats as those loops point back to advertising.

Content consumption tools such as Zite and Prismatic gather data about users to provide personalized selections of articles tailored for mobile. Meanwhile, Circa is working to transform the structure of articles to match the mobile medium by breaking articles into individual updates. How long until these forces combine and algorithms recommend just listicle items 3, 10, and 13-19?

In this emerging data-looped world, where algorithms shuffle content through the tubes, the initial consumer of content is increasingly not human. The consumer is software, and software’s favorite food is data. These forces converging in 2014 will push content to look more like data and data to look more like content. It’s up to us to make sure content still makes a difference in our world.

Going back to the maturity model, the next two steps after optimization are very encouraging: creation of new monetization channels and complete transformation of business models. We’ll save those for the 2015 predictions, assuming SkyNet does not become self-aware. I for one welcome our new robot overlords.

These last few weeks of 2013 are likely to see a bombardment of attractively designed stories intended to evoke an emotional response, tugging at our sentimental holiday hearts. Following Snow Fall’s lead, they will employ a combination of photography, video, and interactive elements that, taken together, provide a complete and compelling tale. Some will just be good character studies, while the best of them will hint at larger societal ills and imply their own predictions about the future. The very best will linger in your mind long after you’ve read them.

mandy-brownNow that the novelty of Snow Fall has gratefully faded, we can move on to the task of understanding what makes these stories work (or not work) and how we can continue to evolve the medium. I have just one wish for the following year: Let’s not neglect the basics.

Lovingly designed and crafted stories are wonderful to experience, of course. But no story should depend upon the presence of videos and other interactive elements; stripped of all styles and embeds, a story should remain readable and compelling on its own.

Put another way: While our designs are more sophisticated, they are, as ever, progressive enhancements on top of a story that must be able to survive without them. Responsive web design is one component of that discipline, but it isn’t enough. We have to assume that most of our readers are just as likely to arrive via an older Android device on an Edge network as they are via the latest Macbook Air connected to Google Fiber. Page weight and loading time matter. (Want a better metric for attention-short mobile readers? To hell with reading time: Tell them how much money it will cost to download.)

Often the best option is to provide (or at least facilitate, via good markup that cooperates with the various read-later services) a version of a story that’s just the text. As it happens, that has some happy additional benefits, too: it’s more likely to be accessible to readers of different abilities, and it won’t exclude readers from parts of the world where bandwidth is either hard to get or expensive.

That is, in our enthusiasm for expanding what we can do on the web, let’s not forget what makes it better than other mediums: the potential to reach anyone, anywhere, regardless of their abilities or wealth. Our designs cannot be beautiful if they are not also universal — crafted to reach a maximum variety of people.

The next Snow Falls will reach even further than our desks and pockets: to our televisions and glasses and the dashboards on our self-driving cars, and to a growing population of people coming online for the very first time. And what they need, more than skillfully executed scrolling effects and image fades, is news about the world. Let’s not neglect them.

What do I think 2014 will bring for the future of news?

You can detect the near-term future in what we can see with our own eyes right now. When I was an editor at The New York Times, I gradually watched the newspapers on my morning train commute give way to smartphones and tablets. The opportunities that created were vast (viz The Times’s digital subscriptions and incredible interactives), but so was the new competition (viz Fruit Ninja and Candy Crush, as well as The Guardian and Mail Online).

Now that I’m a public radio suit, vice president for news at WNYC, what I can see is that every other person — or more, maybe — is commuting with earbuds in. The competition is abundant (viz Robin Thicke or last night’s episode of Homeland), yet the opportunity for those of us who tell our stories in audio form is just as real.

So I predict that what you’ll be seeing in 2014 is that forward-thinking radio news organizations will be making an all-out assault on the earbud-wearing masses. You can call that a “mobile-first audio strategy”; I’m sure there are PowerPoint slides out there somewhere that do. But what it means is that our news reports and stories increasingly will be produced and packaged in forms divorced from the formats dictated by a radio clock.

Big audiences still want to listen to an hour of Morning Edition or All Things Considered, but a whole other big audience wants to hear news stories and talk-show segments as standalone reports: in our app or some other audio app, directly in their Twitter feed, in playlists of their own creation or playlists generated by an algorithm that takes into account their listening habits. That means that, as producers, we will need to create new formats and develop new workflows so that our reporting quickly — and satisfyingly — reaches listeners who don’t already listen to us on the radio or download our podcasts, like On the Media or New Tech City.

I guess I’m predicting more work for me and my colleagues. But I’m also predicting bigger audiences than ever for high-quality audio journalism.

Believe it or not, Apple may have let local media back in the race for advertising dollars in 2014.

For incumbent news publishers, 2013 felt a lot like 2012. Print advertising declined, and online did not grow fast enough. Pew’s State of the Media 2013 put the ratio at about 15 print dollars lost for every 1 print dollar gained.

damon-kiesowAs the mobile tipping point approaches, the old strategies will increasingly flounder. Display ads worked in print because readers understand a mass medium when they see it: one daily edition, one set of broadly-targeted ads. The clickthrough rates were horrible, but it was the best we could do. Online, an endless supply of inventory and a general lack of personal relevance both devalued advertising and made readers less likely to click. On smartphones, where personalization is a core experience, the problem is much worse.

Unfortunately, while “native advertising” reached buzzword status this year, simply creating new ad units is a shell game. Readers and retailers alike will continue their indifference until we find a way to make “advertising” work for them again.

Enter iBeacons, one of Apple’s least-hyped product releases of 2013 — which almost overnight created a potential new revenue model for advertising in 2014. The keys to its potential are location, connectivity, payment, ubiquity, and eyeballs.

On smartphones, GPS and wifi work together to help locate your position. Unfortunately, GPS doesn’t work well indoors (say, in a shopping mall), and wifi alone is not particularly precise.

Apple’s iBeacons (let’s just call them beacons) use Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) chips that are relatively cheap and (when deployed correctly) can pinpoint a customer’s location inside a store down to a specific aisle and product. Each beacon contains a unique ID that it broadcasts, searching for nearby devices. Once your phone recognizes a beacon’s signal any number of actions can be triggered including push alerts or product-specific interactions within an app.

As a customer approaches the cash register, the beacon-enabled phone could transition into a payment platform. The merchant’s point-of-sale system would recognize the customer’s identity, prompt for authentication, and process the charges – perhaps via a stored credit card, iTunes, or Google Wallet.

Wait, Google Wallet? Yes, despite the iBranding, this is not a proprietary Apple technology. Based on Bluetooth 4.0, the underlying standard is available on dozens of Android phones from Samsung, Motorola, HTC, and LG as well as all recent iOS devices. That means there are currently hundreds of millions of consumers already beacon-enabled.

Apple has already begun rolling out the beacons in its retail stores. And, mobile app developer ShopKick is using the technology in a test with Macy’s in New York City and San Francisco. The catch is, to participate in those trials customers need to have the Apple App Store or the ShopKick ShopBeacon app respectively, installed on their phones.

As new merchants join the fray, they will be faced with a dilemma: build a beacon-friendly app, aggregate their services under an umbrella such as ShopBeacon, or do both. Customers have a similar dilemma. Which apps do they need, and how many will they install? Is the limit five, ten, or far fewer?

This is where local media enter the picture. Consider this scenario: A local restaurant chain buys a banner ad in a local news outlet’s native app. Readers browsing the news would see the ad — an offer for 30 percent off of lunch. A click credits the discount to their beacon account in the app.

As the week goes on, the ad could gently nudge the reader in-app or provide a geo-fenced alert to remind them of the lunch discount. After arriving for lunch, the app would recognize the restaurant’s beacons and provide an easy link to an online menu or list of specials.

On the way out, the app would access the bill, apply the 30 percent discount, and ask for confirmation to process the charges.

The fact is, none of those steps are particularly new or technically difficult. That scenario has been the Holy Grail for hyperlocal advertising (and companies from Groupon to LevelUp) for years. But BLE technology is the technology that might finally let it all happen.

For local media, the question is: What is our potential advantage? Apple, Amazon, and Google are fighting it out to be your digital wallet. Square and PayPal want to replace current point-of-sale systems. And every major retailer already has a native app.

But local media still has the local eyeballs, both on the web and in native apps. And those apps carry local advertising.

Some of the pieces to make this work are still missing. Under this model, banner ads would probably be sold at a low CPM, and the revenue would be made on clicks or transactions. And tying together payments and discounts at the point of sale might take some work. But our success in this arena is predicated on reaching local consumers — not in which wallet they eventually pay with. Kind of like what the old model used to look like.

Apple has once again short-circuited an entire industry (say goodbye to NFC for payments) and started a land grab to connect the realms of digital advertising and physical transactions. And the race will be won or lost in 2014.

A couple years ago, my friend Michael Sippey coined the brilliant phrase “Even if it’s fake, it’s real.” He was referring to a possibly-faked Google Street View image making the rounds of an in-progress childbirth. Sippey explains that, regardless of where the truth lies (and there are four distinct potential outcomes, not just two), it doesn’t affect the entertainment value of the image and that we should embrace this new uncertainty.

matt-haugheyAbout a year ago, the Manti Te’o story began to break. The mainstream coverage mostly focused on the catfishing angle of it and painted him an innocent victim, while scrappier sources like Deadspin produced subplots involving friends who may or may not have been involved, their prior criminal activities, and the possibility of this being a coverup for homosexuality in a repressive religion, among many possibilities. To this day, I don’t feel like we know or will ever know where the absolute truth lies in the story.

Over the past few months, I’ve seen an increase in stories that seem outrageous on first read, spread like wildfire, days later get dubbed a hoax, and eventually, with additional information, end up in some sort of ethical gray area between the boundaries of truth and fiction. There’s the famous twerking video hoax reveal of Jimmy Kimmel, the never-ending story of Andy Kaufman’s death, the anti-gay waiter tip hoax (or not), Slate accusing Buzzfeed of not fact-checking the Awful First Class Passenger story hoax, and just recently the telemarketing robot that might be fake — but with additional digging no one is really sure, so it’s tough to say.

I consider myself media savvy, with decades of sniffing out the truth for my own edification and running a news-savvy community of over 60,000 users, and still I find myself feeling duped, confused, but also strangely mildly entertained at the same time. The rise of the 24-hour news cycle and the stresses on news departments to post the latest attention grab are combining with the churn of rumors and tips coming out of Twitter, Facebook, and Reddit (plus the emotional twists of Upworthy and BuzzFeed) to make unbelievable stories a near daily occurrence, with fact-checking falling a bit by the wayside.

The natural reaction is to harden, to move beyond mere skepticism towards defaulting to distrust (without going overboard to humorlessly cynical). Yet at the same time, these strings of stories are offering increasingly complex outcomes amid layers of truth and untruth that only get uncovered in bits over time. In the end, they spark important conversations about important topics, and those conversations don’t feel lessened if and when an original story gets undermined.

In 2014, I see no decrease in this trend. I imagine this pattern of stories — spread through social media into the mainstream, dubbed hoaxes, then finally dubbed more complicated than that — will start to become a fairly common part of the news cycle. At the same time, I don’t see myself grappling with hoax fatigue: Instead, I’m starting to appreciate the spectacle and pattern of this new flavor of breaking news and realizing in the end: Even if it’s fake, it’s real.

(That Street View birth? It was a fake.)

Twitter: It’s a combination newsroom, water cooler, stock ticker, and gossip mill, and still utterly addictive to journalists. Among its many other benefits, Twitter has crystallized a certain realization for me about the future of news: the increasing tendency of a set group of talented writers to coalesce around a given topic. Last year’s predictions hovered around this phenomenon, but didn’t quite address it: Michael Maness spoke of “creating a specific community around the narrative,” leading to “narrow and deep coverage over broad and shallow reporting”; Heidi Moore, of “teams of researchers” who would “think about how to contextualize, present, illustrate, and spread key information, whether it happened that day or not.” These communities now appear to be springing up by themselves rather than in response to managerial imperatives; the members of any given group are liable to work for competing organizations. But however it comes to pass, the “news story” is every day becoming more like a dynamic, living conversation than a series of discrete, disjointed, atomized points of view.

maria-bustillosI follow a number of these groups. For example, for Bitcoin, I follow Timothy B. Lee and Adrianne Jeffries; for education policy, Audrey Watters, Diane Ravitch, Ian Bogost, and Aaron Bady; for the NSA and Snowden, Marcy Wheeler, Jesselyn Radack, Barton Gellman, and Thomas Drake. Twitter makes it easy for me to keep track of these writers and the conversations between them. In time, more and better tools may develop so that anyone interested can locate the key writers on a given subject more easily and quickly. But the most interesting thing about the cream rising to the top faster is that the best writers on a given subject can find each other faster, and join forces; these voices in chorus can then shape an accelerating conversation together. This has led, and will increasingly lead, to an exponential improvement in the quality and reliability of news, just through the power expressed in the very old saying, “Many hands make work light.”

One writer referring to the work of another is nothing new, obviously. But the ease and speed with which we can access one another’s work means that the process of synthesizing results has improved quite a lot. It’s now common to find references and links to very recent work by two or three or ten colleagues in a single piece about events taking place in a day’s time; this has only been possible for the last fifteen years or so, and less than that, in practical terms. It’s taking a long time for editors and publishers to figure out how and when to make use of these tools, for example, deciding how much to permit readers to roam away from their own editorial content. But even so, we’ve already grown quite used to “a news story” as a wealth of tightly focused, hyperlinked information, all decocted for us into an easily sharable, easily readable form that we can read on the train or in a cafe as easily as at the office.

The next step, I think, is that taking in the news will mean finding out exactly who’s writing it — who the posse is, who really knows the score, right now — and giving us the ability to follow that person or group of people very easily. In addition to having access to general information via a daily paper, whether online or off, we’ll also be able to follow a gang of writers on those narrow topics dearest to our hearts as readers: the Affordable Care Act, or stem cell research, or fracking and the environment.

Maybe what I should really say is that I’m willing to pay for that service right now.

Earlier this month, the BBC broadcast a story shot entirely on a drone. Not one second of imagery in the minute-long report from a massive protest in Thailand was from the ground. Not one human being touched the camera while it recorded. Even the closing shot of the reporter ending the story was shot from the drone as it slowly descended into the crowd where the reporter stood, dutifully informing the viewer of just how big the protests were.

Welcome to the Drone Age of Journalism.

matt-waiteIn the next year, you’re going to see more news outlets like the BBC develop their own dedicated drone units, with specialists who know what they’re doing with a flying robot and a camera. You will see photographers, film companies, documentarians, and anyone else trying to tell stories using drones for their work.

This future will be particularly unevenly distributed because of a patchwork of laws that ban commercial drones (U.S.), heavily restrict them (U.K.) or are bordering on quite liberal with them (Australia). But make no mistake — that won’t stop it. It isn’t stopping it now. The technology exists to be able to do really compelling things with drones and visual media. Fewer and fewer people are letting barely enforced and increasingly untenable aviation regulations stop them from taking advantage.

Governments from nations to townships are going to be considering, passing, regretting, defending, and tinkering with laws regarding unmanned aerial vehicles in the next year and in the years afterward. From place to place, the rules will be different. And that inequality will open doors for news organizations to get into the game in much bigger numbers.

But this is not my prediction. That’s too easy. Any idiot with 10 minutes and a Google search can make that prediction.

My prediction: 2014 will be Zero Hour for drone lawsuits. Unproven technology? Unsettled and ill-defined areas of law? A complete lack of time-tested practices and regulations? It’s everything a creative lawyer with a deep-pocketed and angry client could ever want.

Looking right at you, paparazzi.

The seeds are already in the ground for this. There are a smattering of reports from around the world that by the grace of small miracles alone haven’t already resulted in significant lawsuits. There’s the story of someone crashing a small camera drone in midtown Manhattan nearly hitting someone. There’s the cell phone video of a hexacopter suddenly crashing into the stands at a running-of-the-bulls event in suburban Virginia. And there’s the paparazzo getting busted in Switzerland trying to use a drone to film Tina Turner’s wedding.

It doesn’t take an Oracle of Great Sight to see where this is going. It’s a matter of time — and I think that time is 2014 — until a paparazzo with no training and a drone bought off the Internet crashes into a very pretty face.

It won’t be malicious. They’ll just lose control. Or they won’t understand that the blinking red light means land now because your battery is going to die. Or the wind will pick up. Or another paparazzo will slap the controller out of their hand so their competitor doesn’t get the shot.

And that pretty person in that movie everyone loved is going to need a different kind of plastic surgery.

And that whooshing sound you hear will be legislators at every level rushing to create terrible, reactive, and free-press-hostile laws to make sure it never happens again. Never mind that existing areas of law already cover most of the issues involved. But no one gets re-elected making minor tweaks to shore up existing statutes.

The fact is, paparazzi already view lawsuits and arrests and busted cameras and car accidents as the cost of doing business. Why should it be different when it comes to drones and aviation authority regulators? In the U.S., the one fine the Federal Aviation Administration has issued to a drone operator was $10,000. For exclusive shots of certain celebrities, prices are easily double, triple, and more than that. Do you want these photos, glossy magazine editor? The fine is rolled into the price.

That means there’s little regulatory impediment. There are some criminal laws that could come into play, but they’re untested in the U.S. when it comes to First Amendment principles and have never been used in conjunction with drones. So criminal prosecution, at least right now, might not be a deterrent.

So what’s left is a generic and easily ignored sense of liability that would kick in if something went wrong. If you’re too arrogant to believe something will go wrong, or if the financial incentives are so high that you’re willing to take the risk, there’s nothing to stop you from getting paid for drone captured celebrity photos.

I believe that there’s a tremendous opportunity for responsible users of drone technology to do some really amazing and societally beneficial things. I think responsible journalists using strong ethical and legal reasoning for their actions will lead the way on the integration of drones into our lives. I am realistically optimistic for widespread use of drones in society.

But do not think the path to that Drone Age is going to be completely smooth. And I fear the first pothole in the road comes in 2014. And it might be a doozy.

If you are standing in front of a plane crash wearing a torn pilot’s uniform, reporters would be justified in asking you questions about what happened. If you tweet about being onboard or seeing the plane come down, it’s extremely hard to know whether or not to believe you, because it’s so hard to know if you’re actually there.

In 2014, expect both technology and attitudes to shift to make determining proximity to news events far, far easier.

philip-bumpIn the media’s defense, it’s only been about five years since the number of potential witnesses to a news event became nearly infinite. When something happened somewhere in 2008, there was a local team who would head to the scene, interview and filter witnesses, and report back. In more remote locations, maybe a national network would be there within 24 hours. Those things still exist, but the timeframe has collapsed. Deadlines once drove news reporting; now, the deadline is often the moment something happens, and witnesses to a news event are almost always available instantaneously on social media.

We don’t know how to deal with that — mostly because we’ve proven to be relatively bad at verifying authenticity in the face of a culture that seems weirdly amused by tricking the press. If we’re better able to tell where witnesses are, that job becomes easier.

There are two ways to identify when and if someone on social media was close to a news event. They can post visual or auditory media from nearby. Or their posts can be tagged with a location. In 2014, those tools will expand (thanks to ad sales teams), but so will the readiness of users to share location information in the first place.

In an essay at Business Insider earlier this month, the site’s executive editor, Joe Weisenthal, indicated that his preferred engine for surfacing details about news events was Instagram. His argument, in brief:

Instagram isn’t perfect, but for the most part you don’t get re-posts (though re-gramming is a thing on a small scale) and you can fairly quickly establish whether a person’s photo makes sense in the context of their previous images. Whereas on Twitter lots of people are news curators, on Instagram people mostly all do the same thing: post what they see right in front of their eyes at that time.

What they purport to see in front of their eyes isn’t necessarily accurate. But it’s much easier to fact-check a photo than a sentence. That’s one of Weisenthal’s point, but the benefits of Instagram go further.

Visual news searching didn’t originate with Instagram. For years, YouTube has been an essential tool for reporters looking to find visual information about an event quickly. But Instagram has two massive advantages over YouTube. For one, the clips are shorter — and therefore have a lower barrier to entry and quicker time to upload. And two, Instagram puts location information front and center. It’s baked into the product. This was often one of the reasons that people suspected that Facebook found Instagram appealing as an acquisition target: Instagram moved geolocating to the background. Facebook’s stumbling Places tool put the onus on users to identify where they were. Instagram treats that data as icing to sharing a picture or video, and quietly makes location-sharing opt-out. Weisenthal’s right. That’s much better than YouTube.

Facebook wants location data because it wants to give you the right ads. That’s certainly a large reason why Twitter is putting a new emphasis on location, rolling out a tool to show nearby tweets. (Which will provide the tool’s apparent name: “Nearby.”) It’s actually a fascinating idea: extending your social network from friends and family (Facebook) to people you choose to learn from (Twitter) to people in the same place as you (“Nearby”). If one of those nearby tweets is was promoted by a coffee place that has a discount for Twitter users, great.

But imagine a Twitter in which every tweet is geotagged. Instagram search would pale in comparison. Twitter just needs to make it work.

Twitter has allowed users to tag their tweets with a geocoded location for some time. When the feature was first introduced in 2009, the company, like Facebook with Places, tried to encourage adoption with only mixed results. The tool isn’t tricky, but very few people, even in the media, use it. If Nearby can expand that adoption, it helps Twitter’s bottom line. And, obviously, it helps those looking to validate tweets from a particular location.

One reason the company might feel more optimistic about its second stab at expanding geolocation is that — thanks in part to tools like Instagram — people are beginning to feel more comfortable using location data on their phones. It’s only been five years since the media was suddenly inundated with eyewitnesses, but it’s only been about that long that the witnesses have had network-linked computers in their pockets. We’re getting more comfortable with that. Maturing.

Pew Internet’s most recent report suggests that only 30 percent of Americans have automatic location-sharing turned on for social posts, and three-quarters use some geolocating tools on their mobile devices. But phones already have tools to trigger reminders or alerts based on location, something IFTTT is expanding with proximity triggers, using your phone’s location to create a rudimentary sort of RFID-simulator. Understanding the phone as a location-based tool isn’t insignificant. Get smart developers expanding how that understanding is applied, and suddenly you have an ad hoc witness verification system. Geolocated tweets. More Instagrams. An instantaneously identifiable and near-instantaneously confirmable pool of witnesses.

AOL’s Patch stumbled in part because it tried to spread reporters across the country to report from the scene. But the reporters are already there, if you can find ones you can trust. In 2014, it seems likely that this will get easier.

I admit it: My media consumption has perhaps been at an all-time low this past year. That’s not because incredible work hasn’t been made and made ridiculously, easily accessible. It’s just that at the end of very long days and longer weeks, the thought at jumping online to see what everyone else has been making, too, has for whatever reason, not been the most compelling thought. Sleep (and watching Breaking Bad) have been.

Thus, rather than grasping to identify a pattern or trend for which I’ve only glimpsed shadows, I’m going to hit you with two kinds of predictions: the ones I really hope will transpire and micro-predictions I know for sure will.

The hopeful predictions (a.k.a. please steal these ideas and do them)
jennifer-brandel
Newsrooms will pattern themselves increasingly after the tech sector, taking on methods of agile development.
An industry leader or two will move from concentrating on distributing content to distributing innovation. They’ll task themselves with figuring out the necessary conditions to allow for space innovation within their own shops and/or allow a sandbox of sorts for outside collaborations. This space will be budgeted for and protected by allotting time for experiments to truly run their course. There will be a plan in place for what “running their course” actually means and how to measure success.
Newsrooms will try more collaborations across departments and beats. Like pairing up reporters on seemingly unrelated beats and tasking them with finding stories that intersect both areas of their expertise. Or holding gatherings to showcase the most exciting stories, apps, films, etc. that employees have seen or made and then figure out what worked and why.
Independent, entrepreneurial storytellers with cultivated audiences will continue to scare the crap out of those holding tight to traditional business models.
New positions in newsrooms will crop up, with titles like API strategist, animator, and civic app acquisitions manager.
Newsrooms will acquire one of every popular phone, tablet, and phablet so reporters and developers can test how their content looks and responds on every device.
Newsrooms will institute something like 20-percent time (as Google does, or did?) to allow employees the sanctified time to figure something out, try something new, or consume stories that inspire them in their work.
Audience engagement techniques will begin shifting away from the mindset of “What can they do for us?” to “What can we do for them?”
The pretty-sure-thing micro-predictions
A hungry journalist will be desperate for a snack on a late-night deadline and steal someone else’s food from the community fridge, spurring two all-staff emails and aggressive new signage around the kitchen.
A board member will say “just use email newsletters” as the way to bundle and disseminate content, and it will, in a way, make a lot of sense.
Making newsroom apps and responsive sites will take 37 percent longer and cost 37 percent more as developers have to make everything work and look good not only for the major browsers but also for dozens of phones and tablets and phablets.
Someone will use the word “transmedia” incorrectly.
Someone will invent a new word to essentially mean “transmedia.”
An API will change shortly after a giant investigation pulling from multiple APIs is published.
An executive will make the decision to try to fund a new and necessary venture through Kickstarter and it will not make its goal.
A native ad will have unfortunate placement, resulting in a lawsuit.
A journalist will complain of too many sugary treats to celebrate colleagues’ birthdays and milestones, yet be visibly disappointed when a healthy alternative is offered.
The BuzzFeedification and Upworthiness of headlines will spread to a seemingly “above that” legacy news operation.
There will not actually be “an app for that” — instead, a responsive website.

Even as revenue-strapped news outlets continue to cut staff, we need to celebrate in 2014 a new reality: Media entrepreneurship is at an all-time high.

jan-schafferOnce-fledgling startups now count their employees in the 100s. International news players see enough U.S. market promise to open operations here. Startup accelerators are nurturing scores of ideas for media “jobs to be done.” Journalism schools are designing media entrepreneurship programs to meet growing demand.

The Investigative News Network (INN) counts more than 90 members. The new Local Independent Online News (LION) Publishers association has attracted more than 100 members just in its first year.

Some of this growth has been by acquisition, some by adding new products, some by internal expansion and some via new launches. Vox Media, for one, counted 85 employees in 2011 and had expanded to some 300 by earlier this year — and that was before it acquired Curbed, Eater, and Racked. Politico lists some 180 employees on its website plus another 26 at its newly purchased Capital New York. The Huffington Post identifies 317 employees online — not counting operations outside the U.S. Likewise, Buzzfeed says it has more than 300 staffers. And that’s just for starters.

The Qatar-owned Al Jazeera America launched here four months ago. The three-year-old RT America, the first Russian English-language news channel, has become one of the most-watched foreign news channels in the United States. The Guardian U.S. launched its New York-based online operation a little over two years ago, finding fertile grounds for expansion here.

We saw some important media-entrepreneurship milestones this year; more will come next year. All will have a ripple effect on redefining news, reconsidering news conventions, validating new players, and re-imagining news distribution. Consider the possibilities of some of these 2013 mileposts.

Tech-daddies (and mommies) entered the journalism space. How will Jeff Bezos reconfigure The Washington Post? What will Pierre Omidyar create with his embrace of Glenn Greenwald? How will Twitter advance with Vivian Schiller as its new head of news?
Public broadcasters entered full-bore mergers with independent news startups. In Colorado and in St. Louis, public broadcasters have formally combined with enterprising startups to begin to increase and amplify local news coverage. These efforts promise models not only to sustain local news coverage but also to open new doors for engaging audiences.
Also this year, we saw the first individual hyperlocal news startup execute an exit. The five-year-old Sacramento Press figured out how to calculate a valuation so that a local Internet marketing company could buy it. It is in the vanguard of working out how small news sites can establish their value so they can be sold when their founders need to move on. Serial entrepreneurship should be as doable in media as it is in Silicon Valley.
One of my many hats is journalism educator, teaching mid-career professionals who have ideas for media startups. Of the 12 in this year’s MA in Media Entrepreneurship cohort group, only two hailed from journalism. Others came from Siemens, NASA, private schools, nonprofits, and advertising.

They all have very focused ideas for “jobs to be done” (in disruptive guru Clay Christensen-speak). They are not necessarily journalism jobs, but they are definitely media jobs, anchored in the digital information space. So for 2014, let’s stop the handwringing about losses in legacy journalism and work on creating and growing the next acts in media.

I lost track of the number of conversations this year that set off the impostor syndrome alarm bell in my brain. At first, I thought people were just being modest. But it soon became clear that people were reluctant to recognize in themselves the same traits that awed them in other people. This dynamic holds people back while also overtaxing the limited number of anointed experts. And 2014 is going to be another busy year: Olympics, elections, World Cup. In order for the journalism-tech community to continue to grow and do incredible work, we must shake off the specter of impostor syndrome.

erika-owensSpeak up. To start, we need to admit we have an impostor syndrome problem. Knight-Mozilla Fellow Noah Veltman clearly laid out how much of an issue impostor syndrome is and how it’s harming the journalism-tech community. He also raised another important part of contending with it: bringing visiblity to the questions everyone has as they are learning (and we are all always learning).

As more people grapple with impostor syndrome publicly, it brings transparency to the process of how someone gets to be regarded as an expert. How even experts ask questions. How those experts often want to share what they know — not just with other experts, but with anyone interested in learning. Twitter is a great way to watch those conversations unfold. In 2014, we’ll all need to challenge ourselves to more publicly share and document not just how we deal with insecurity, but how we build our skills, networks, and confidence.

Band together. Until this year, I didn’t fully understand how networking functions as a critical welcoming and support structure in this community. I found this out principally through joining the Tech Lady Mafia. At first I was intimidated: How could I offer anything useful or compete with these amazing women? But over time, I started to realize that TLMers were awesome in their own individual ways that not only did not detract from each other, but actually bolstered one another. I then got to put the power of the network — the people I met, the tips I learned — to work in publicizing the Knight-Mozilla Fellowship. This year we had a four-fold increase in female applicants, which I attribute in large part to recognizing the power of these existing networks to help people deal with their reservations and reach for big opportunities.

I look forward to TLM continuing to grow in 2014 and to seeing other similar public and semi-private networks flourish.

Reach out. There’s a quiet confidence that comes from not just being good at what you do, but also being respected by your peers. This year, we’ve seen some great work from conference organizers to include speakers of diverse backgrounds, and efforts like that are important to dismantling impostor syndrome. Consciously including new faces and voices in conferences, publications, and invitations to lead and teach demonstrates that expertise exists within all of us. Tools like the OpenGenderTracker also help increase awareness of how limited our existing networks may be, and what we can do to ensure that the people we spend the most time reading are representative of the wider communities we live and work in.

From NICAR to Nieman Lab, opportunities abound to herald the work of everyone in this community. And 2014 will have plenty of ‘em.

Impostor syndrome is something many of us have been struggling with individually. But it’s also something we need to contend with as a community. 2014 is our chance to talk openly, build connections, and foster new leaders who will have the confidence to create projects that are only little sparks of an idea now, but will someday become the next project-turned-verb.

In 2014, you will be scooped by a reporter who knows how to program. Yes, you. Not the reporter a few cubes over. Not that guy you went to j-school with. You.

Scott KleinSure, reporters don’t need to know how to program. But there are lots of things reporters don’t need to know how to do. They also don’t need to know how to write — plenty of great scoop artists can barely write their names and get heavily rewritten by harried editors. Plenty of great writers are nervous types who never get the hang of convincing strangers to tell them their secrets. And we all know reporters who don’t know how to write a FOIA letter and who can’t bear the thought of reading the avalanche of documents that, with luck, arrive in response.

You can be a good journalist without being able to do lots of things. But every skill you don’t have leaves a whole class of stories out of your reach. And data stories are usually the ones that are hiding in plain sight.

Scraping websites, cleaning data, and querying Excel-breaking data sets are enormously useful ways to get great stories. If you don’t know how to write software to help you acquire and analyze data, there will always be a limit to the size of stories you can get by yourself. And that’s a limit that somebody who competes with you won’t have.

Here are some great stories from the last 12 months by programmer/journalists that any of us would have been proud to have written:

A story from Al Jazeera America analyzing stolen user accounts looking for common insecure passwords, written by a recent MIT grad.
A story about online retailers that secretly offer different prices to people based on where they live, reported by a team that includes two programmers.
A story — and interactive database — that involved writing software to detect self-censorship on a popular Chinese social networking service, and then showing readers images that were deleted.
You probably haven’t gotten beaten by a journo-nerd yet. Your luck may hold out for a while. But somewhere out there is a recent j-school grad who’s just started covering your beat. She’s raw, and she has no rolodex. When she talks to sources, her voice shakes and she doesn’t ask all the questions she should. But she studied Python and statistics, and she can use OpenRefine and PostgreSQL, so she’s faster than you. And she’s about to publish something you thought nobody but you knew about.

You won’t know she’s coming. You’ll never hear her footsteps because you aren’t reading the email lists where she asks her question about how to parse XML from the agency you’ve been bird-dogging for years. You won’t hear from your sources that she’s calling around, because she already knows what they know and she’s gonna call them only when it’s too late for you.

You may feel like leaving programming to the professionals. But your next great story is locked away inside a data set. Why let somebody else get it first?

2013 was a great year of experiments — expanding styles of reporting, making engaging and beautiful articles, and infusing new frames of thinking — but 2014 will be when newsrooms apply what they learned more broadly, to their whole organization.

allen-tanThere are great benefits from having sibling projects — a submarine that can go dark and operate with great latitude, acting in tandem with a battleship, bringing massive amounts of firepower to bear once it points in the right direction. What’s learned from experimentation gets fed back, gets easier and cheaper to do, and raises the bar for future experiments.

And there’s much to explore. Ambient interfaces will begin to appear as data trickles into watches, televisions, clocks, cars — but with new affordances. While smartphones and tablets are deeply personal and interactive, these new devices sit in communal space, in the background: How do you design something that accepts minimal input but is aware of its environment? What does glanceable information look like?

The security implications of the Snowden leaks on reporters will sink in. Precautions formerly developed for foreign investigative journalism will be more common. “Cellphone-proofing” and disconnected computers will form air-gaps to hold important sensitive documents; two-factor authentication and encrypting internal network traffic will make intrusions to the newsroom more difficult.

Lastly, a personal wish for more collaboration with those that share our values. Museums, libraries, archives, and other public institutions make natural allies, as they begin to build new tools and practices that mirror our own. Institution-making is a messy process, but it doesn’t have to be a lonely one.

Of the ten biggest news stories of 2014, seven will be broken by newspapers or wire services with editorial staffs of more than 100; one by a smaller “legacy” newspaper; one by a radio or TV news organization; and one by an online-only news operation founded in 2004 or after. In discussions about journalism and its future, that tenth story will be the focal point of discussion and most of the nine other stories will barely be mentioned.

Another prominent topic in discussions about journalism will concern a tremendously important issue — Issue X — that explodes upon the scene and generates endless commentary about “why the media failed to cover Issue X.” The answer will be what it has been since Walter Lippmann got it right 90 years ago: Journalism is not a truth machine but a searchlight that picks up aspects of reality that obtrude upon the world at a moment when the searchlight hits upon that location. If, by chance, the searchlight passes by that part of the globe before the big moment, and an astute reporter writes about disturbing trends that might lead to an Issue X disaster, few will notice at the time or recall the story later.

People like me will remind data enthusiasts that journalism is about stories, not data. Data are vital resources, but someone has to apply intelligence, art, and ardor to them to make them a matter of public interest. And then, I hope, someone will also notice that journalism is neither all about data nor all about stories. It is also “Heavy rain expected tomorrow” or “Mandela dead at 95″ — the former related to data but not data, the latter implying a story (as every obituary does, as every life does) but not a story. It is a news “item,” and very useful to millions of people as advice, as notice, as guidance, as admonition, as recipe — but not a story. And it is also essential to what we mean by news.

For some time, we’ve been waiting for the “Internet of Things” to arrive in full force. We’re told it’s really happening this year. Connected refrigerators that know if it’s snowing outside have always sounded interesting, I guess, but it was never clear to me what problem they were solving.

fiona-spruillSome of the people and companies working on wearable technology, however, are tackling interesting problems, and I predict we’ll see at least one of these products move into the mainstream in 2014. As that happens, there will be opportunities for news organizations to be a part of this movement. They can do so by thinking creatively about how to deliver highly personalized news and information and by experimenting with new and perhaps more intimate ways to tell stories using these devices.

I’m not suggesting that every newsroom start 2014 by prioritizing the development of a Galaxy Gear app. It is still early days, and there is no denying that Google Glass and the current crop of smart watches still appeal to a small audience — mainly tech-savvy men with a fair amount of disposable income.

But if you think about how dependent everyone has become on their smartphones — and the habits and behaviors that have developed as a result of this addiction — there are things about the way we interact with our phones and one another that are ripe for improvement. The fact that you can’t walk down the sidewalk without bumping into people looking at their phones, or go to a restaurant without seeing people on their phones all around you, is not necessarily an awesome byproduct of technological innovation. (I plead guilty to both offenses.)

Our dependence on these devices for everything from news to social interaction to shopping to directions is so powerful that there is a need to distill the most vital information and bring it closer to the body, reducing the need to look at our phones all the time. That’s how I think about smartwatches and the problem they’re solving. It’s not that everyone has a burning desire for their watches to be smarter. And reading long articles on your wrist or through Google Glass doesn’t seem appealing either. That’s not what this is about. It’s the merging of the wearable devices with the phone that offers exciting possibilities.

For example, the latest version of the Fitbit, the Force, has a screen for tracking fitness stats in real time so you don’t have to look at your phone for that information. The wristband is also integrated with iOS 7 so that it vibrates when you get a phone call. The Pebble watch takes this further. This review of how iOS 7 notifications work on the Pebble does a good job of explaining how it is solving the problem of information and alert overload on the phone.

So as functions of the phone shift to the wrist or to eyewear, that opens up the possibility for news organizations to deliver customizable nuggets of information to these devices. The new alerts in the Breaking News app, and the way you have a sense of both how frequent and how invasive the alerts are likely to be, offer a hint of the possibilities of this level of customization. In the realm of video, a startup called Watchup is experimenting with personalized newscasts for Google Glass. You can begin to imagine the possibilities, especially for media companies with giant databases of information. The key will be personalization that is super-simple.

And then there are cool possibilities for innovative storytelling. I recently saw Project 2×1, a Kickstarter-funded short documentary film that was shot in part using Google Glass. Could the filmmakers have achieved almost the same effect without using wearable technology? Sure. But there was a nice intimacy to some of the shots. You have to think there is potential there for some interesting storytelling and user-generated projects, as taking video becomes as easy as saying “OK glass, record a video.”

Smart journalists should experiment now, because at least one of these devices will move out of the geeks-only realm before we know it.

Any American editor will proudly tell you that the newsroom — and especially The Editor — is the sole custodian of the news(paper) brand, the true keeper of what the masthead is really meant to represent.

raju-narisettiAnd if you ask anyone on the business side at most American publishing houses — especially in the advertising/sales department — you will likely hear a grudging acknowledgment of this odd reality, an admission that the newsroom does have the final, veto-proof say on the vast majority of issues involving the use of the brand.

There is a good reason for this unchallenged, even if incongruous, reality. For decades, when newspaper ad departments were essentially order-takers, simply “booking” ads and incoming revenue, all that a news brand — such as The Wall Street Journal or The New York Times or The Washington Post — stood for, was entirely the journalism, which until very recently was merely the physical newspaper. There was little need to “extend” the brand, to find new ways to use the masthead’s name — and more critically, the news brand’s relationship to customers — to generate other revenue. Over time, the editor and the newsroom’s grip on what the brand is, what it should be and also what it couldn’t be, became embedded in the very foundation of the Church and State demarcation. A fait accompli, if you will.

Just how has this “newsroom owning the brand” manifested itself in most mainstream American newsrooms? In 2013 alone, we saw:

High profile, creative journalism experiences mostly run ad-free, with highly engaging acts of digital storytelling actually generating negative revenue for publishers (because even normal ads on the website were deliberately “designed out,” essentially turned off on these pages, instead of accommodating new kinds of sponsorships/ads).
Conversations about how a publisher’s advertising team and their non-news content-creators can engage and work with deep-pocketed brands wanting to become storytellers have stalled over some genuine and largely unproven newsroom fears that sponsored content/native advertising will be the ruin of their news brand.
Media critics, usually former editors/reporters who don’t have the burden of funding a newsroom — continue to feel rather well qualified, as de facto guardians of the news brand, to use their bully pulpits to publicly challenge any and all brand extensions, be it events, a themed cruise or any branded, paid-for service, including even the mere existence of shopping on news web sites.
Newsrooms and editors blithely citing “reader perception” issues, often without any actual and measurable evidence, to stonewall transparent and user-friendly ecommerce hyperlinks or, heaven forbid, serving contextual product ads.
Paywalls are owned by circulation when it comes to generating paying customers for journalism, yet newsrooms continue to insist on owning critical content levers that can be used by circulation to help drive conversion of “drive-by” audiences into paying audiences.
Now, wishfully, let us fast forward into 2014.

If publishers are to build sustainable business models through a combination of advertising dollars, reader revenue, and smart adjacent businesses, then one of the biggest stumbling blocks will be this prevailing, meek public acceptance of the newsroom’s primary ownership of the brand by those in product, advertising, circulation, marketing, public relations, and indeed by many publishers.

Just because a news “brand” was almost never leveraged for anything other than journalism for decades doesn’t entitle a newsroom to its veto-proof card, especially when such power currently comes without real accountability to help sustain the brand, not just the brand’s perceived reputation but also its financial health.

Don’t get me wrong. The complaints that editors — and many journalists — express, often mostly in private, about their “business” side — they don’t read or understand the product; they can’t seem to sell what news does well but always want something new; they only care about closing an ad buy and not about readers — aren’t entirely made up, even if they are way overdone.

But for the news brand to succeed and a publishing house to find sustainable business models for journalism (usually the single largest expense for a publisher), the brand has to be co-owned: by those who create journalism, those who can turn that journalism into a product, those who try and monetize that product, and those who support and promote that entire package. Editors, by virtue of their critical role as maestros of journalism, will always be first among equals in any publishing house that values honest, independent journalism. Still, the privileged status a newsroom enjoys ought to come with accountability and a responsibility to help sustain both journalism and the business of journalism.

For 2014, here are six specific suggestions for publishers to help loosen the newsroom’s default chokehold on the news brand, and try to more formally connect daily acts of journalism to the long-term business of funding that journalism:

If the newsroom cites potential reader “confusion” or “perception” as the reason to simply not do something that doesn’t seem like it will hurt the news brand, ask for evidence. Chances are most journalists/editors haven’t actually talked to many readers, if any at all, recently, and are not beyond projecting their own confusion/perceptions on to readers. Sure, there is a good place for personal skepticism to inform decision-making, but that can no longer be a substitute for actual reader feedback.
Create formal reader-survey processes and A-B testing mechanisms that everyone — including the newsroom — agree, in advance, will be used to help settle merely subjective disagreements on issues related to redesign, fonts, modules, and, especially, the use of labels. (Native advertising, anyone?)
Since editors are prone to talking the mobile and digital talk but not necessarily walking that talk, ask key newsroom staffers to take on specific goals aimed at getting more people to consume more journalism, especially on mobile. For instance, first mapping and then tracking the mismatch between audience peaks and intra-day story publishing patterns on web/mobile.
The editor — or the designated liaison between newsroom standards and advertising — should always be able to turn down ads, especially when obstructive (and annoying) ads are being pitched as innovative ads. But ask then if the newsroom standards team will also agree to take on the goal of actually approving at least five new ad campaigns in a year — especially ad templates that are truly innovative and can engage readers and appeal to advertisers.
Offer to create an ad innovations team made up of representatives from news, product, technology, ad operations, and ad sales. The team is charged with coming up with new ad formats that first meet the newsroom’s approval and are then taken to clients. Ask the editor or an influential newsroom nominee to head up this team. This structure can also help deal with the unwillingness of some newsrooms to even share, ahead of time, the broad topic that a new reader experience, such as those spawned by The New York Times’ Snow Fall, is going to be used for, therefore making sure the ad department can’t really monetize it fully.
For publishers with paywalls, if the newsroom’s homepage team wants complete control over what stories are set free or moved behind a paywall, they must then agree to take on joint goals around conversion (moving visitors to readers to paying subscribers) with the circulation department.
Nothing can be worse for a news brand than no longer being able to afford to pay for and publish what actually created an enduring brand. Constricting revenue sources and opportunities without actual evidence of negative brand impact has been a self-inflicted problem stemming from newsroom brand ownership that is not shared by key stakeholders. When it comes to digital, there is a collective amnesia, which goes against our industry’s experience, about how journalism and advertising, when designed to work well together, works best for our customers — audiences and advertisers alike. The revenue generating departments of a news brand, which have either become complacent or diffident in a digital world where potential clients have endless alternatives to the often single news brands being pitched, can’t use their lack of brand ownership as the excuse to not innovate on behalf of the news brand.

Publishers have simply been too afraid to hold newsrooms accountable for their lack of cooperation around both creating and integrating innovative revenue-generating opportunities for the very news brand that everyone actually has a vested interest in preserving.

Here is hoping that in 2014, the news industry will find a good answer to this long-ignored question of who should own the news brand.